[Amit Varma]: Are you a proud Indian? I will answer that question this way. I love my country and I
[Amit Varma]: certainly count myself as patriotic. I think it is irrational to feel pride at anything
[Amit Varma]: other than one's own achievements. And even that may be irrational given that free will
[Amit Varma]: may be an illusion. Despite this, I do feel a tinge of irrational patriotic pride sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: such as when Vishy Anand plays a beautiful game of chess, or Jasprit Bhoomra takes another
[Amit Varma]: international wicket with an unplayable delivery. Now, if you do recognize pride as a legitimate
[Amit Varma]: emotion in a national context, then it's fair also to recognize the other side of that coin,
[Amit Varma]: shame. And that brings up the question, should we not be ashamed that after 72 years of independence,
[Amit Varma]: so much of this country still struggles to put food on the plate. So many of us live
[Amit Varma]: in the 19th century, while a few elites live in the 21st. And that misogyny and identarian
[Amit Varma]: divisions continue to tear us apart. A country with our wealth of natural resources, and
[Amit Varma]: by that I mean our people, should have become a developed economy by now, with citizens
[Amit Varma]: who are comfortable in their skin and confident of their place in the world, instead of carrying
[Amit Varma]: so much baggage from a partly imaginary past. Although I think our nation is at a specific
[Amit Varma]: crisis point today, I will not blame this just on the party in charge right now. Our
[Amit Varma]: current ruptures are like a cardiac arrest suffered by a patient with terminal cancer
[Amit Varma]: and chronic diabetes. We have been afflicted for all 72 years of our existence, and we
[Amit Varma]: owe it to ourselves to face up to our afflictions. We cannot do it by creating binaries today
[Amit Varma]: or one party good, another party bad. I often say that the BJP behaves as if history ended
[Amit Varma]: at 2014. And they should not be held responsible for what has happened since. The Congress
[Amit Varma]: behaves as if history began at 2014, as if the decades of misgovernance had not ravaged
[Amit Varma]: this nation before that. If we want to recover as a nation and actually give ourselves reasons
[Amit Varma]: to be proud Indians, we must look inward with a critical eye. So much that goes wrong gets
[Amit Varma]: normalized so fast, we must tear away that layer of normalization and be outraged again
[Amit Varma]: and be outraged constantly and collectively. Outrage is not just our privilege as Indian
[Unknown]: citizens. It is our duty. Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Kapil Komi Reddy, whose excellent
[Amit Varma]: book Malevolent Republic brims with informed outrage. And reading it, I began questioning
[Amit Varma]: myself why am I not angrier? As all listeners of this show would know, I am usually outraged
[Amit Varma]: enough for all of us. Kapil's book casts a merciless eye over all of Indian politics
[Amit Varma]: with no corner left untouched. He takes no prisoners. But before we begin our conversation,
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break. If you're listening to the scene and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: it means you like listening to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case,
[Amit Varma]: I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook
[Amit Varma]: platform that has a massive range of audiobooks from around the world. The international collection
[Amit Varma]: is stellar, but so is a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of
[Amit Varma]: it and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors
[Amit Varma]: this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on
[Amit Varma]: that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Fascism A Warning by Madeleine
[Amit Varma]: Albright. This is a subject that is relevant today and a book you should listen to. That's
[Amit Varma]: all I'll say about it. Fascism by Madeleine Albright on Storytel. Download their app or
[Amit Varma]: visit Storytel.com. Remember, it is Storytel with a single l, Storytel.com. Kapil, welcome
[Amit Varma]: to the show. Thank you for having me, Amit. Kapil, before we sort of begin talking about
[Amit Varma]: the book and so on, tell me a bit about your personal journey, which in a sense is salient
[Amit Varma]: because your book also connects the personal with the political. So where did you grow
[Guest]: up? Where did you get educated? Who were your early influences? So I had a, as I write about
[Guest]: my upbringing in my book, I grew up in Hyderabad. I was born there and I was sent at a young
[Guest]: age to a madrasa, an Islamic seminary, because my father decided that an exposure of that
[Guest]: kind would inoculate me in later life against sectarian temptations. His own family had
[Guest]: suffered during the partition. Not a lot of people know this, but we seem to think that
[Guest]: South India didn't suffer the ravages of partition. That's not true. Hyderabad was singed by the
[Guest]: furies of partition and my family were among those who suffered, who were exposed to those
[Guest]: furies. And my father's politics were in some sense a reaction to that. So he enrolled me
[Guest]: at a madrasa where I spent some time and I didn't have reasons to look back on that upbringing
[Guest]: with much fondness or nostalgia because I was shipped out of Hyderabad. I was sent to
[Guest]: Northern India. I went to a boarding school and then I sort of travelled around India
[Guest]: from place to place, hopping from school to school. When I reflect on that childhood,
[Guest]: it's so strange because there are so many fragments that do not fit into a whole. And
[Guest]: then in my teenage years, I went away to England. Then I came back to India later and I met
[Guest]: a childhood friend from my time at the madrasa and his life was, had taken such a drastic
[Guest]: turn from my own. He'd been exposed to the roughest edges of the Indian state and reflecting
[Guest]: on how he experienced India and how I experienced India made me arrive at, made me question
[Guest]: many of my assumptions about Indianness because for someone of my background, being born Indian
[Guest]: is a source of, being Indian is a source of tremendous pride. You think of India as this
[Guest]: exceptional entity, but for him, India meant none of those things. And it forced me to
[Guest]: reckon with my own understanding of India. And that's why I began the book the way I
[Amit Varma]: did without personal reflection.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of strikes me that part of that personal reflection also is that you are shaped
[Amit Varma]: by, you know, the circumstances that took you wherever they took you. And Murad, your
[Amit Varma]: friend is also shaped by the circumstances that he was sort of in. And, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of the sort of larger questions that kind of struck me when I was reading that part
[Amit Varma]: of the book is about how much of our beliefs are shaped by our circumstance. You know,
[Amit Varma]: and I say this not just about the ordinary person, not just about you or me who have
[Amit Varma]: had, you know, different kinds of very privileged upbringings, but also when we sort of look
[Amit Varma]: back on our leaders, like recently, for example, there were two interesting biographies of
[Amit Varma]: Veer Savarkar by Vikram Sampath and Vaibhav Purandhare. And, you know, reading them also
[Amit Varma]: led me to his present diaries. Now, Savarkar's thinking is something that I absolutely loathe,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you know, Hindutva is a horrible, horrible book. But the interesting thing is,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I realized in that book was that till about 1910, you know, Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: believed that Hindus and Muslims together had a place in India, that they were both
[Amit Varma]: part of this nation. And then he spent all those years in the Andamans where he suffered
[Amit Varma]: terrible torture. And a lot of the intermediaries between the British jailers and him were this
[Amit Varma]: sort of class of Muslim jailers, you know, Pathans and so on. And the torture he suffered
[Amit Varma]: at their hands radicalized him and made him incredibly anti-Muslim. And there was a case
[Amit Varma]: of sort of how circumstance radicalized one man and changed his thinking in such a way
[Amit Varma]: that he then writes a book and that book then shapes a cultural movement. And suddenly all
[Amit Varma]: of that is at the center of everything today. And I don't mean this as apology for Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: in any way. I think of him as vastly as a negative figure. And the ideology that he
[Amit Varma]: played a part in fomenting is, of course, hurting our country today, as you write about
[Amit Varma]: so eloquently in your book. But circumstances do play a big role. For example, Ram Guha
[Amit Varma]: talks about how Mahatma Gandhi, you know, Mohandas Gandhi comes back from London and
[Amit Varma]: is unable to really hold down a job in Bombay. So he goes to South Africa, where perforce
[Amit Varma]: he is employed by Muslims and he has to work with them. And, you know, he faces colonial
[Amit Varma]: injustice and also later on in his movement as the Satyagrahas go on, he cannot get by
[Amit Varma]: without the support of the relatively lower class Tamils, who are also in South Africa
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, so again, you see how Gandhi's syncretic vision is shaped by circumstance
[Amit Varma]: and Savarkar's radicalism is shaped by circumstance. And it also strikes me and maybe I'm rambling
[Amit Varma]: here but that this can lead to vicious circles of a kind. And what are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: That is extremely fascinating. When you were saying that, one of the things I was thinking
[Guest]: is the parallel between Savarkar and Jinnah. One of the excuses proffered for Jinnah is
[Guest]: that he was a good man who was damaged by the conduct of the Congress Party and then
[Guest]: decided to retaliate in the manner he did. And it's true that if you look back on Savarkar's
[Guest]: history of the mutiny or the great rebellion, you see shards of hope in that. You see him
[Guest]: write about Hindu-Muslim unity, a kind of unity forged in opposition to British occupiers.
[Guest]: There are still elements of resentment there, self-hatred there, but there's also hope there.
[Guest]: And as you say, his experience of prison completely destroyed the remnants of humanity within
[Guest]: him. There's a fascinating paper by Ashish Nandy, the parallels between Savarkar and
[Guest]: Jinnah. Jinnah is radicalised during his time, during his interaction with the Congress Party.
[Guest]: He leaves for England in 1931. In 1929, his young wife is dead. In 1931, he goes to England.
[Guest]: By the time he comes back, he's a completely different man. He no longer believes in Hindu-Muslim
[Guest]: unity. He sees Muslims as a distinct people. It is the experience of bigotry, of being
[Guest]: treated as a lesser creature by people you think of as your equals that prompts him to
[Guest]: discard everything he held onto in his previous life. And that's the case with Savarkar too.
[Guest]: A lot of us are shaped by our circumstances, that's true, but it's important to mention
[Guest]: here that your misery doesn't confer upon you the right to inflict suffering on other
[Guest]: people. And what Savarkar did is he became an extremely sadistic human being in his later
[Guest]: life. He wrote prescriptions for Hindus to torture Muslims. He wanted bodies of Muslim
[Guest]: women exhumed and molested. He wanted tit-for-tat retaliation. He wanted Indian soldiers to
[Guest]: go and molest Pakistani women. And when his wife died, he couldn't even bring himself
[Guest]: to weep. His humanity had almost evaporated. And that is the tragedy of psychological trauma,
[Guest]: psychological damage. And there's something eerily similar about Savarkar and Jinnah.
[Guest]: They're so alike, the two men. Jinnah is often put in the same camp as Gandhi and Nehru.
[Guest]: Jinnah really belongs in the same pantheon as Savarkar.
[Amit Varma]: I would actually say that, you know, till maybe around 1920-21, Jinnah is one of the
[Amit Varma]: great moderates. You know, Jinnah was part of a band with, you know, Gokhale and Ferozia
[Amit Varma]: Mehta and all of those and Gandhi looked up to Gokhale enormously. And what happens is
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi comes back from South Africa, Gokhale dies soon after. But, you know, Gokhale has
[Amit Varma]: read Hind Swaraj, Gokhale has spoken to Gandhi. He knows that Gandhi is anything but a moderate
[Amit Varma]: in that sense. He's sort of all over the place. He's like a black swan event in terms of ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And Gokhale's advice to Gandhi, obviously, is just don't enter politics now, travel the
[Amit Varma]: country for a year, which he dutifully does. Though after Gokhale dies as a tribute, he
[Amit Varma]: does it without wearing his shoes, I think, which is slightly weird. And then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he tries to make a mark at the Congress. The first time he's there, I think 1918 or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: he fails utterly. But then the Khilafat movement happens. And Jinnah finds this extremely incongruous
[Amit Varma]: and incoherent that you have a demand for this larger Muslim ummah tied together with
[Amit Varma]: this quest for Indian nationhood. And this coming together doesn't make sense to him.
[Amit Varma]: But this coming together is a willing or unwilling tactical ploy, which allows Gandhi to take
[Amit Varma]: over the Congress Party and Jinnah walks out in disgust and says, I will never have anything
[Amit Varma]: to do with this again. And it's very interesting that how then this person who was until then
[Amit Varma]: a great moderate leader, suddenly then goes off into this different direction driven by
[Amit Varma]: circumstances and you have a very good quote in your book by Lincoln, which you sort of
[Amit Varma]: Distinction will be his paramount objective. Yeah, where I'll just go that you say quote,
[Amit Varma]: where Lincoln was warning against, you know, demagogues of a particular sort, and obviously
[Amit Varma]: not Jinnah at that time, because what would he know? And he said, quote, distinction will
[Amit Varma]: be his paramount object. And although he would as willingly perhaps more so acquire it by
[Amit Varma]: doing good as harm, that opportunity being passed, and nothing left to be done in the
[Amit Varma]: way of building up, he would set boldly to the task of pulling down, stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: there are a lot of fascinating counterfactuals here where, you know, if the black swan event
[Amit Varma]: of Gandhi doesn't happen, then Jinnah is probably a great moderate leader. And we remember Jinnah
[Guest]: is a man ahead of his times. Jinnah, the first election Jinnah fights is against a Muslim
[Guest]: League candidate. And Jinnah goes about telling Muslims that you know, the idea of Hindu Muslim
[Guest]: disunity, enmity, animosity, is a bogey invented by the British to divide you. Jinnah is the
[Guest]: kind of guy who wants to outgrow his religious identity, and fuse himself into the Indian
[Guest]: identity, a broad Indian identity, and he wants to create a pan Indian identity. And
[Guest]: he, when Gandhi comes, his ambitions are thwarted. Gokhale, his great mentor dies, and Gandhi
[Guest]: just seizes the nationalist movement by mobilizing people around religious unity created by appealing
[Guest]: to their worst instincts. That is completely antithetical to everything Jinnah believes
[Guest]: in. The other person that it alienates is Savarkar. Savarkar is also appalled by it
[Guest]: because Savarkar believes subsequently that this is a kind of bribe to the fundamentalist
[Guest]: Muslims. Jinnah believes that this will create monsters that we will not be able to slay.
[Guest]: Were they both right? They were both right. Of course, they were both right. But the radicalizing
[Guest]: movement Jinnah obviously feels that, you know, here I am an Indian, who is this interloper
[Guest]: coming from South Africa and telling me and sidelining me. Jinnah has every right to feel
[Guest]: that resentment. Savarkar and Jinnah then take a very radical turn, as you know, the
[Guest]: radicalizing movement for Hindu nationalists is the Mughla Massacre. And the failure of
[Guest]: the Congress Party to adequately condemn that, to forcefully condemn that, because the Congress
[Guest]: Party has entered into an alliance with the most fundamentalist faction of the Muslim
[Guest]: community. And Hindu Mahasabha feel that Congress is not really, much like Jinnah feels that,
[Guest]: you know, Congress is now beholden to religious interests, not to national interests. And
[Guest]: Hindu Mahasabha progressively detaches from the Congress Party. And Savarkar's book is
[Guest]: actually read by Heghewar in 1923 in manuscript form. And Heghewar is a lifelong Congress member.
[Guest]: And he founds the RSS in 1925. And Jinnah also detaches himself, is disgusted, frankly,
[Guest]: by everything the Congress Party is becoming under Mahatma Gandhi, or Gandhi at that stage,
[Guest]: he won't call him Mahatma. And there is a remarkable similarity between the two sides.
[Guest]: And they're both right, obviously, for different reasons. Jinnah is appalled that Mahatma that
[Guest]: Gandhi is legitimizing the most extreme segments of the Muslim community. And the Hindu nationalists
[Guest]: are also appalled for the very same reason.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's really interesting. And like you said, the Hindu Mahasabha was almost a faction
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress in the sense that it was an interest group, it was almost a cultural thing
[Amit Varma]: more than a political thing. One of its pioneers was Lala Lajpat Rai. So, and then subsequently
[Amit Varma]: over the decades, it got radicalized. What is also happening here, this interesting parallel
[Amit Varma]: movement, which, this is brilliant book by Akshay Mukul called The Founding of the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Press, which sort of explodes, right, and I had a great episode with him. And what also
[Amit Varma]: sort of begins to happen here is that you find other forces, for example, other impetuses,
[Amit Varma]: that is newly rich Marwari businessmen in Calcutta now decide that we want to sort of
[Amit Varma]: rise up the ladder in terms of status and whatever. And, you know, Akshay speaks very
[Amit Varma]: interestingly of how the earlier sort of partnership between the Kshatriyas and the Brahmins sort
[Amit Varma]: of now changes as the Marwaris insert themselves. And one of the ways in which they do this
[Amit Varma]: is by funding the Gita Press and funding a lot of the Hindu nationalist movement. And
[Amit Varma]: what I found remarkable about his book, and which should not have been an eye opener to
[Amit Varma]: me, but was, is that there was this profoundly strong cultural movement that was building
[Amit Varma]: up from the 20s, which was planned, which had enormous impetus, like we often look at
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva quite correctly, as not really an Indian ideology, it's inspired by European
[Amit Varma]: fascism and, you know, that kind of nationalism, which, you know, wasn't sort of ingrained
[Amit Varma]: in India. So in that sense, a political ideology, yes, is inspired by all of that. But there's
[Amit Varma]: also a cultural movement gradually building up, building up, building up. And in some
[Amit Varma]: ways, it could be argued that the politics has today finally caught up with culture.
[Guest]: What are your views on that?
[Guest]: There were multiple strands to the what we now call Hindu nationalism. If you look at
[Guest]: the RSS's founding charter, it is explicitly anti-fascistic, actually, because it has rules
[Guest]: against personality cults. And it seeks to emancipate the individual from the bane of
[Guest]: caste. And in pre-independence India, the RSS playgrounds were one of the few places
[Guest]: where people of different castes would come together, because caste was seen as the dividing
[Guest]: instrument, the thing that divided Indians and enabled foreigners to conquer India so
[Guest]: swiftly was because Indians, Hindus were divided by caste. So RSS in that sense was quite radical
[Amit Varma]: in its outlook.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even Savarkar was very anti-caste.
[Guest]: Savarkar was extremely anti-caste. Again, one of the parallels with Jinnah is that neither
[Guest]: of them, you know, were really believers in the faith around which they mobilized people.
[Guest]: But there were different strands. As you said, there was a cultural strand, there was a political
[Guest]: strand, there was a militant strand, all of them fused. And there was no particular design
[Guest]: behind the fusion. They just came together because of the chaos and tumult of India's
[Guest]: political scene at the time. And the blend of that created mixing with the resentments
[Guest]: fostered by the partition of India.
[Guest]: Remember that Hindu nationalism did not have an audience beyond upper caste men for a very
[Guest]: long time. Hindu Mahasabha was electorally, you know, it didn't perform very well electorally.
[Guest]: The audience for that argument really came into existence after partition, because once
[Guest]: a state had been created for India's Muslims, the argument went that what remained was going
[Guest]: to be the state for Indian Hindus. It's Nehru and the Congress Party that stopped them from
[Guest]: seizing power, that banished them from the centers of power. But culturally, those resentments
[Guest]: brewed precisely because they were not offered a seat at the table. They were able to mobilize
[Guest]: people from the ground up. These propagandists went to every village, every town in India,
[Guest]: and they patiently worked for years. They would go into villages. They created a brotherhood,
[Guest]: an ideological brotherhood, whose power we only realized in the 80s. So Indian society
[Guest]: had become immersed in this alternative world, which the political world wasn't really aware
[Guest]: of. And when the two sides caught up, the dissolution of the secular state was very
[Amit Varma]: rapid.
[Amit Varma]: So I have sort of three responses to this third question. One response is that I would
[Amit Varma]: hold that the cultural movement that led to Hindu nationalism, so to say, was not something
[Amit Varma]: that really, you know, began after partition or was driven by the propagandists of the
[Amit Varma]: RSS and so on. It was like, you know, as the history of the Gita Press shows, it was alive
[Amit Varma]: and throbbing even before that. My second observation would be that when we look back
[Amit Varma]: at Hindu nationalism, I think it might be a mistake just to look at groups like the
[Amit Varma]: RSS and the Hindu Mahasabha, because there was a strong strand of Hindu nationalism very
[Amit Varma]: different from the Hindutva nationalism of today, which was within the Congress itself.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, right from Madan Mohan Malviya, Lala Lajpat Rai, and even at the time of independence,
[Amit Varma]: you had Patel, Pant, Prasad, even later on Lal Bahadur Shastri and Gulzari Lal Nanda,
[Amit Varma]: who was one of the founders of the VHP. And my question, therefore, is a dual question.
[Amit Varma]: One is that, is it a remarkable accident of history that it happens to be Nehru, who was
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister at that time and was able to shape early India, as opposed to pretty much
[Amit Varma]: all the other leaders around him were of a different persuasion? And I don't mean that
[Amit Varma]: necessarily in a negative way, but, you know, more of that. And secondly, could it also
[Amit Varma]: be argued, and I have asked this question to various guests on my show and got very
[Amit Varma]: interesting answers, which is basically that our constitution, which to my mind is not
[Amit Varma]: liberal enough, but is way more liberal than our society. Is our constitution, a liberal
[Amit Varma]: constitution imposed on an illiberal society? And if so, A, how can that imposition be liberal?
[Amit Varma]: And B, then are the people who have taken, who have finally won the political battle today,
[Amit Varma]: are they then justified in saying that this constitution has no validity?
[Guest]: Right, you've packed quite a bit into that. So let me answer that. So the first question
[Guest]: is about Nehru. So I often look back on Nehru, and I think we got very lucky with Nehru,
[Guest]: because Nehru was one of his personality flaws was that he could look at society with an
[Guest]: open mind, but he had his own prejudices. He looked at economics as the principal unit
[Guest]: of organization. He couldn't appreciate until very later in life the role of religion in
[Guest]: shaping society. And so he, people who were passionate about religion, who wanted to organize
[Guest]: around religion, he had great contempt for those people. And that's one of the reasons
[Guest]: he didn't appreciate the popularity of the Muslim League until it was very late. But
[Guest]: once Pakistan was founded, he was uncompromising in his resolve that India was not going to
[Guest]: go down that path. And he was a man not only of moral rectitude, but also incredible physical
[Guest]: courage. I relate an incident in my book when, you know, he just get in a car and drive around
[Guest]: places in Delhi, where there was communal rioting, and he'd get personally involved
[Guest]: and try to stop violence. And in one instance, you know, he learned that a group of Sikhs
[Guest]: was planning an attack against Muslims. And he told them, if you hurt a single hair on
[Guest]: the head of a single Muslim, I'll send in tanks and blow you to bits. That was the kind
[Guest]: of man he was. And then a Muslim shop owner rang him from Chandni Chowk. And he got through
[Guest]: to Nehru, he rang the Prime Minister's office and Nehru answered the phone. You could do
[Guest]: such things back in the day. And Nehru immediately got in the car and arrived on the scene and
[Guest]: supervised clearance of the mobs. This was the kind of man Nehru was.
[Guest]: Contrast this with Ehsan Jafri trying to get through to Modi when the attacks were happening.
[Guest]: I've often contrasted that with Jinnah not paying a visit to refugee camps. But look
[Guest]: at our own history. Let's leave Pakistan aside. LK Advani tried to get through to Modi and
[Guest]: LK Advani pleaded with Modi to send forces to Ehsan Jafri's house and Modi completely
[Guest]: neglected that. That is the story, reportedly, I must add. And Ehsan Jafri was gashed to
[Guest]: death by these people. So we got very, very lucky with Nehru, I think. Your second part
[Guest]: of the question, sorry, you'll have to forgive me.
[Amit Varma]: My second part of the question, therefore, was about what today's cultural warriors quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote often talk about a liberal elite, which is out of touch with the nation.
[Guest]: So the Constitution of India was not an imposition. There's a very fascinating book that I've
[Guest]: just finished reading by Madhav Khosla, India's founding movement. And he makes the argument
[Guest]: that the Indian Constitution, Nehru was asked once, what do you think your legacy will be?
[Guest]: He said, probably, I hope 300 million Indians capable of governing themselves. What he meant
[Guest]: by that was that the Indian democratic experiment was not so much an imposition as a training
[Guest]: exercise. It was creating citizens. It was making citizens of the people who had known
[Guest]: only subjecthood. The Indian Constitution granted rights to people, even if they did
[Guest]: not know how to exercise them. There were many arguments that said that the introduction
[Guest]: of franchise suffrage should be phased, should be incremental. Those were rejected out of
[Guest]: hand by people like Ambedkar, who said that the very act of giving them rights and inviting
[Guest]: them to exercise those rights would be a form of cultivating democratic citizenship. And
[Guest]: that's what has happened over the past seven decades. The breakthrough of Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: has happened precisely because India is a democratic society. Had India been anti-democratic
[Guest]: secular republic like Turkey, they would have been firing squads long time ago. And Hindu
[Guest]: nationalists would not have been in a position to seize power. They have in Turkey. They
[Guest]: might have here, but not in the manner they have. They wouldn't have had the democratic
[Guest]: legitimacy they have today. So the Indian Constitution is not an imposition. It's not
[Guest]: the vision that animates it is certainly liberal and the society to which that vision was being
[Guest]: imparted was illiberal. But that is not to say that the Constitution itself was an imposition.
[Guest]: The mismatch between the two only means that it bespeaks the audacity of the creators of
[Guest]: the Constitution. It doesn't mean that India was ill suited for that Constitution. If anything,
[Guest]: Indian democracy has demonstrated the suitability of Indians. Indians are an extremely democratic
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I have to point out here that I, I'm not against that particular imposition
[Amit Varma]: in this case, but I will still hold that it's an imposition because while I agree about
[Amit Varma]: the nobility of intent and also the pedagogical nature of the Constitution, which Madhav writes
[Amit Varma]: about so well, in his book that it was not it was one of his tasks was to be an instruction
[Amit Varma]: manual on how citizens could relate to each other as equals. And in that sense, it's very
[Amit Varma]: underappreciated if anything, but regardless of that, the argument could be made that society
[Amit Varma]: wasn't quite like that wasn't remotely as liberal and the argument and that then brings
[Amit Varma]: up the paradox that the liberal constitution in its liberality, enabled the illiberal society
[Amit Varma]: to sort of rise up against it and take over the politics of the day. Does that make any
[Guest]: kind of sense to you?
[Guest]: Yeah, it makes perfect sense. Because the rise of the liberal is only made possible
[Guest]: by a liberal constitution. It is because the Constitution guaranteed qualified free speech.
[Guest]: It is because the Constitution allowed the BJP to form to come into existence, that the
[Guest]: BJP was able to succeed the Johnson. And it was able to mobilize people around the Ram
[Guest]: Janmabhoomi issue. It is precisely because of a liberal constitution that illiberal elements
[Guest]: came, came to power. It is, and it is, that is not an argument to put an end to the liberal
[Guest]: constitution. It is an argument to reclaim the liberal constitution.
[Amit Varma]: I think I know, I agree with you, but I'd phrase it differently. What I would say is
[Amit Varma]: it is not an argument to end the liberal constitution. It is an argument to spread liberal values
[Amit Varma]: in society. So they arise from the culture in a bottom up way, instead of from the polity
[Amit Varma]: in a top down way. Because anything which comes from the polity in a top down way will
[Amit Varma]: inevitably break unless the culture also shares the same values.
[Guest]: I could not agree with you more in that sense, because unless people are educated to understand
[Guest]: what they're being given, they will misuse it. It is, to use an extremely crude example,
[Guest]: if you install a Western toilet in a place where people aren't accustomed to using those,
[Guest]: they will not be able to use it properly. And it will become rather obsolete very quickly.
[Guest]: But I don't think that is the case with India, because the Indian constitution and the values
[Guest]: that drive that constitution and the Republic of India is not ill suited to Indian needs.
[Guest]: I think it does meet the Indian need. And what was the principal Indian need? The principal
[Guest]: Indian need was to undo the injustice of caste, was to emancipate the individual from the
[Guest]: grip of the community. You could not, I think, do those things without creating a charter
[Guest]: of rights, without creating a state that would forcefully enforce those rights. And that
[Guest]: is what the Indian constitution did. Where it failed, I think, is not in its conception,
[Guest]: but it's in its execution. If anything, I think the Indian state wasn't forceful enough.
[Guest]: And that's where I think your argument that the society itself, that people, the institutions
[Guest]: created by the state fail to enforce those rights and ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So, to come back to what you're saying that I'll again disagree. And you know, you said
[Amit Varma]: that the conception was correct, the execution was flawed. I would say that the execution
[Amit Varma]: being flawed is a result of the conception being flawed. Because number one, I would
[Amit Varma]: say that this coercive power of the state is not going to solve any of these problems.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, none of these problems have been solved. We are still, you know, the caste
[Amit Varma]: problem is still acute. Women are still second class citizens. Economically, we are still
[Amit Varma]: desperately poor, though much better off because of various events of happenstance, but nowhere
[Amit Varma]: near where we should have been. And I would say a lot of this is because of the coercive
[Amit Varma]: power of the state gone wrong. And another argument I have made, and this was a question
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to ask you numerous times while reading your book, is one of the things that you're
[Amit Varma]: book does very well, and we'll go over some of that is point out who pretty much all the
[Amit Varma]: people who led our country were desperately flawed, perhaps Nehru the least, but even
[Amit Varma]: he was desperately flawed. And I have made the case before that, for that you need to
[Amit Varma]: look at incentives, the incentives that bring politicians into politics, which again has
[Amit Varma]: to do with the conception of the kind of state we should be in the sense that the reason
[Amit Varma]: our freedom fighters were such great leaders by so many great leaders emerged during that
[Amit Varma]: time is that they weren't incentivized by a lust for power, because there was no power
[Amit Varma]: to be had. They were fighting for certain abstract ideals, they believed in them enough
[Amit Varma]: to die for them. And therefore, you had that great generation of leaders, you do not have
[Amit Varma]: leaders like that today, not because people in general are bad, or the bad people happen
[Amit Varma]: to get to the top, but simply because the incentives of politics are different. The
[Amit Varma]: state is so powerful. And the course of hand of the state is so appealing, that you have
[Amit Varma]: this interplay between money and power, which is inevitable in a democracy, if you don't
[Amit Varma]: watch out for it, where to win elections, you need a lot of money, and then money needs
[Amit Varma]: return on interest. And the more coercive power the state has, the greater the return
[Amit Varma]: on interest. And therefore, you end up with these sort of sociopathic semi mafia goon
[Amit Varma]: type of leaders, where I argued at all political parties, actually, different mafia gangs are
[Amit Varma]: competing to get the monopoly on violence for five years, or whatever the period might
[Amit Varma]: be. So I'd say that at a fundamental level, we need to imagine, we need to re examine
[Amit Varma]: the design itself, the conception itself, by which I don't mean that constitution per
[Amit Varma]: se, because I'm sure most of the things you admire about it, are things I admire as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not complaining about its quote, unquote, imposition, I'm just saying that this will
[Amit Varma]: only work this great Indian experiment can only work if it comes from the bottom up through
[Amit Varma]: society through our culture. And we have utterly failed in that.
[Guest]: So to answer that question, you have to look at the Congress Party. Now, the Congress Party
[Guest]: is created to fight the British to fight British imperialism, which is a noble cause. And there
[Guest]: are no incentives in fighting the British, you don't get bags of cash, you don't get
[Guest]: high office. But nonetheless, you fight the British because it is an ideal you believe
[Guest]: in. And that drives people to join the Congress. That drives people to relinquish everything
[Guest]: their relationships, their homes, their incomes, to fight for this cause. Congress becomes
[Guest]: a vehicle for the realization of Indian independence. Once India becomes independent, what is the
[Guest]: Congress Party? What is its purpose? Mahatma Gandhi says, let's dissolve Congress, because
[Guest]: it has served its purpose. Now India needs to look at itself differently. India needs
[Guest]: different kinds of parties, India needs to govern itself differently. But Congress becomes
[Guest]: a post independence, a political party for the Republic. This creates a problem, because
[Guest]: the Congress Party is a beneficiary of a great fund of goodwill, goodwill generated by its
[Guest]: work during the freedom movement. So the result of this goodwill is that it is bound to win
[Guest]: four or five elections, no matter what it does, it is guaranteed five electoral victories.
[Guest]: And it wins those electoral victories. But in the course of winning those electoral victories,
[Guest]: the ambitions of the people who sit at the top of the Congress Party alter. The first
[Guest]: generation of Congress Party leaders are animated by the desire to create a great socialist
[Guest]: republic. They are animated by Nehru's vision. But the second generation of leaders are animated
[Guest]: by something different. They are animated by the desire to perpetuate themselves, to
[Guest]: leave their stamp on history, to remake India in their own mould, to build cults of personality.
[Guest]: And no one does this with more egregiousness than Indira Gandhi and her son Sanjay Gandhi.
[Guest]: This is the point at which it is not India that becomes, it is not India that falls first.
[Guest]: It is the Congress Party that falls first. And we have to remember that Congress Party
[Guest]: for a very long time was India. It really spoke for India for a very long time. Its
[Guest]: values were reflected in the constitution. Its values were the values of India. What
[Guest]: the Congress felt was India was what the world thought India was for a very long time. Congress
[Guest]: was socialist, so India was socialist. Congress was secular, so India was secular. Congress
[Guest]: believed in non-interventionism and non-alignment, so India was non-interventionist and non-aligned.
[Guest]: And Congress was democratic, India was democratic. And what did Mrs. Gandhi attack first? She
[Guest]: attacked the democratic pillar of the Congress Party. She destroyed that. And she created
[Guest]: a cult of personality around herself. Once the Congress Party fell to the Gandhi family,
[Guest]: India fell to the Gandhi family. And the gangsterization of Indian politics began under Sanjay Gandhi.
[Guest]: The caliber of people, initially, Mrs. Gandhi's advisors were a group of very scrupulous Kashmiri
[Guest]: pundits. Subsequently, Sanjay Gandhi infested the Congress Party with thugs from Punjab
[Guest]: and other places. So, the caliber of these people, they were men like Bansi Lal.
[Amit Varma]: The repulsive remnants of that gang of people include Kamal Nath, our current Chief Minister.
[Guest]: Kamal Nath, Pranab Mukherjee, in fact, was brought in by Sanjay Gandhi. There are other
[Guest]: names that miss me. Ambika Soni was one of the people who came in via the Sanjay gate.
[Guest]: This is the moment at which Congress becomes something else entirely. It loses its moral
[Guest]: luster. It becomes a vehicle for the perpetuation of one family's power. Congress was a dynastic
[Guest]: force before. Motilal Nehru was a Congress President. He orchestrated Nehru's rise within
[Guest]: the party. Nehru, you know, looked the other way when Indira Gandhi was rising. But those
[Guest]: were faults of omission. Those were fairly benign actions. In retrospect, they look more
[Guest]: egregious than they actually were at the time. But what Indira Gandhi does is consciously
[Guest]: egregious because she decides to install her son as the leader of the Congress Party. And
[Guest]: Congress never really recovers from the 70s. And India never really recovers from that
[Guest]: moment. But the reaction to the Congress Party, once Congress has lost its moral luster, the
[Guest]: Hindu nationalists, the opponents of the Congress Party, the communists, the rest, are now more
[Guest]: freely able to say that this is not the party that won us the Indian independence. This
[Guest]: is the plaything of one family. And they gain greater legitimacy in the eyes of people.
[Guest]: And the collapse of democracy within the Congress Party is actually the beginning of democratic
[Guest]: expansion within India because the alternatives to the Congress Party have a more legitimate
[Guest]: claim to make against the Congress Party. And you see, it is from the 70s, it is in
[Guest]: the 70s that for the first time Congress Party is defeated. Mrs. Gandhi loses her seat. Sanjay
[Guest]: Gandhi loses his deposit. So, you talked about the liberal leading to the liberal. This is
[Guest]: actually an illustration of that. You know, many of the people who fought against Mrs.
[Guest]: Gandhi were ideologically not very liberal. But they were Democrats. You know, they vehemently
[Guest]: opposed what she did to the constitution. And many of the people whom we would associate
[Guest]: with Hindu nationalism were actually people who were willing to respect the constitution,
[Guest]: willing to function as Democrats. And what happened to the Congress Party was profoundly
[Guest]: shocking for them. And they lost their faith. This was a moment when a lot of people who
[Guest]: believed in India were disillusioned. But they also fought very hard to reclaim India.
[Guest]: And alas, the mystique of dynasty, the incompetence of the government that replaced Mrs. Gandhi
[Guest]: meant that Mrs. Gandhi was voted back into power again. But the Congress Party had by
[Guest]: then ceased to be a democratic force at all. The Congress Party was nothing but the property
[Guest]: of the Gandhi family. And once Mrs. Gandhi died, Rajiv Gandhi was installed in office.
[Guest]: And here you see the complete poverty, ideological poverty of Rajiv Gandhi. He had no convictions
[Guest]: at all. And he presided over the total dissolution of the secular state bequeathed by his grandfather.
[Guest]: He made a series of concessions to competing communists. He banned the satanic verses.
[Guest]: He imposed a roundabout ban on it, not a direct ban. He opened Ayodhya, the Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: He legislated to deny Shah Bano alimony granted to her by the Supreme Court of India, driving
[Guest]: Arif Mohammad Khan, who was a liberal congressman, out of the party. And he claimed to be Mr.
[Guest]: Clean, became involved in one of the worst corruption scandals of the time. And he claimed
[Guest]: to be an inheritor of the mantle of non-alignment and yet made India militarily a party to the
[Guest]: conflict, civil war in Sri Lanka, and paid the price for it, sadly, with his life. But
[Guest]: this is a point at which the legitimacy of the Congress Party is in tatters. And alternative
[Guest]: arguments have a wide audience. If the Congress Party had remained morally untainted, I don't
[Guest]: think the BJP could have made such a forceful breakthrough as it did in the 80s and 90s,
[Guest]: such an impressive breakthrough. Every time we think about the detrition of Indian institutions
[Guest]: and what India has become subsequently, the decay of India's values, we must look at Congress,
[Guest]: because the history of the Congress Party is really the history of India, politically
[Amit Varma]: speaking, looking at the state. That's a beautiful illustration of, you know, a degradation over
[Amit Varma]: time because of what I would say is incentives. Before I sort of elaborate on one aspect of
[Amit Varma]: that which came to mind as you were speaking, I'd also like to, you know, you have a really
[Amit Varma]: nice anecdote in your book about how, you know, Rajiv Gandhi looked upon as such a clean
[Amit Varma]: character, good person, well meaning, so and so. And you have an anecdote about, I'll quote
[Amit Varma]: from your book, quote, who could forget his visit to Andhra Pradesh in 1982, soon after
[Amit Varma]: being installed by his mother as a party's general secretary. The chief minister of the
[Amit Varma]: state, Tanguturi Anjaya, a Dalit, went to receive him at the airport. In this, he was
[Amit Varma]: following the custom instituted by Sanjay. But Rajiv, who considered himself modern,
[Amit Varma]: took great umbrage and exploded with invective. The chief minister had endured a lifetime
[Amit Varma]: of vicious abuse at the hands of upper caste Hindus, many of whom still considered physical
[Amit Varma]: contact with him spiritually defiling, but being berated in late life by a man half his
[Amit Varma]: age broke him. He began to shed tears. Rajiv called him a buffoon and drove away, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And a couple of thoughts. One is, of course, an observation that a friend had once
[Amit Varma]: made that if you look at the Nehru Gandhi family, what you see is that with each generation,
[Amit Varma]: they get more and more incompetent, which seems to me broadly to be correct, and which
[Amit Varma]: also seems to align with another observation, which is perhaps pure happenstance that with
[Amit Varma]: each generation of leaders within the Hindutva movement, they tend to get more and more radical
[Amit Varma]: all the way from, you know, Vajpayee to Advani to Modi to Shah to perhaps Adityanath next
[Amit Varma]: and God knows what. But the larger point that your story kind of brought up is that when
[Amit Varma]: I was earlier speaking of incentives mattering, it was not just in the kind of people who
[Amit Varma]: join politics, you know, good people joining for the right reasons, bad people joining
[Amit Varma]: for the wrong reasons, but also that within the same individual, you see different responses
[Amit Varma]: to incentives. And this is really illustrated in your book by, you know, the sort of change
[Amit Varma]: that happened within Nehru itself. I mean, there were early signs of it, like you point
[Amit Varma]: out in 1929, at the Congress Party Convention in Lahore, Jawaharlal rode a white horse to
[Amit Varma]: the convention, and the crowd screamed long live Jawaharlal Nehru, the uncrowned King
[Amit Varma]: of India, one of the anecdotes in your book. But what is also a fascinating paragraph for
[Amit Varma]: me, and again, I'd like to sort of read it out. And here you talk about Nehru post independence,
[Amit Varma]: and you say, quote, the man who in the colonial period had observed that logic can always
[Amit Varma]: be made to fit in with the desires and irrepressible urges of a person was in the republican era,
[Amit Varma]: capable of rationalizing frequent departures from his avowed beliefs, the principled anti
[Amit Varma]: imperialist and acolyte of Mahatma Gandhi, who never tired of dispensing prelections
[Amit Varma]: about peace to modern leaders had few misgivings about utilizing disproportionate force against
[Amit Varma]: people he claimed as his own. In Kerala in the south, he engineered the overthrow of
[Amit Varma]: a democratically elected communist government. In Kashmir in the north, he presided over
[Amit Varma]: an anti democratic farce. In Nagaland to the east, he authorized the bombing of Christians
[Amit Varma]: who had had the temerity to demand from India, what India had sought from the British, the
[Amit Varma]: Armed Forces Special Powers Act, an extraordinarily repressive piece of legislation enacted by
[Amit Varma]: Parliament in 1958, to grant impunity to agents of the state dispatched to stamp out insurgencies
[Amit Varma]: in India's peripheries, embodied Nehru's ruthless resolve to preserve the Indian Union at any
[Amit Varma]: expense, a stop code. And at one hand, all of this is obviously, you know, Nehru very
[Amit Varma]: oddly and something that as a student of Gandhi, he would never have done stops disregarding
[Amit Varma]: means as an end in itself. And secondly, you see this corrosiveness in his character where
[Amit Varma]: he is doing all of these things, perhaps with some self awareness, perhaps with one none
[Amit Varma]: one doesn't know, and and also enabling dynasty, you know, in Indira became president of the
[Amit Varma]: Congress Party in his lifetime. And as you point out in the book, his cabinet colleagues
[Amit Varma]: felt that he was grooming her for dynasty. Is this a story that to you as a student of
[Amit Varma]: history as well seems poignant that men have so many different shades to them, and how
[Amit Varma]: you can fall with circumstances?
[Guest]: Yeah, in the case of Nehru, once he became the Prime Minister of India, his greatest
[Guest]: obsession was holding this thing together. I also mentioned you've obviously elaborately
[Guest]: quoted from the book, but I also mentioned in the book that Nehru was a democrat at heart.
[Guest]: He often didn't get his way. And he accepted that when he didn't get his way. He wasn't
[Guest]: an authoritarian. You could make the argument that he wasn't an authoritarian because he
[Guest]: didn't have the need to become an authoritarian. The Congress Party really listened to everything
[Guest]: he said. He was held in tremendous esteem by the public, and he got his way for them
[Guest]: for almost anything he wanted. For most of his life, he got his way most of his prime
[Guest]: ministerial career. So he didn't really have the need to be an authoritarian. And yet,
[Guest]: to people in Kerala, to people in Kashmir, to people in the East, he was an authoritarian.
[Guest]: His conduct was a departure, a shocking departure from everything he claimed to believe in.
[Guest]: That part of Nehru must not be effaced or airbrushed, because we need to appreciate
[Guest]: Nehru fully as a whole. And part of the reason Nehru did this is because he became very insecure
[Guest]: about Indian unity. This is the irony. Once you give people the rights, they demand things.
[Guest]: And once they demand things, the state finds it very difficult to grant them those things.
[Guest]: And this conflict was illustrated by Nehru's conduct in different parts of the country.
[Guest]: This does not take away from the fact that Nehru was an extraordinary figure, and this
[Guest]: does not take away from the fact that India was lucky to have Nehru in so many ways. But
[Guest]: it nonetheless remains a fact that Nehru did institute certain practices. He did give us
[Guest]: the AFSPA, which we still haven't been able to relinquish after all these years. It is
[Guest]: still used against our own citizens. And we still live with his legacy in Kashmir. And
[Guest]: his most damaging legacy, of course, I'm sorry to say, is his family. We still live with
[Guest]: that. And we haven't recovered from what the family has done to this country over the years.
[Amit Varma]: I'd say in a sense, they are the sort of symptom and not the disease. In the sense, again,
[Amit Varma]: I think a problem goes back to the conception of the state itself. You know, before we head
[Amit Varma]: over to Greg, I want to quickly take a poetic break, which is, you know, towards the end
[Amit Varma]: of your book, you've quoted Sahir Ludhianvi, which is very interesting because Sahir Ludhianvi
[Amit Varma]: was one of those Muslims who came from Pakistan to India. And he wrote sort of these beautiful
[Amit Varma]: lines.
[Amit Varma]: Wo waqt gaya, wo daur gaya, jab do kaumon ka nara tha. Wo log gaye is dharti se, jinka
[Amit Varma]: maqsat batwara tha, ab ek hai sab hindustani. And broadly, I'll make an attempt to translate
[Amit Varma]: it. That time is gone, that age is gone. When slogans spoke of two nations, those people
[Amit Varma]: too have left this land who aim for our separations. Now all Indians are one. Now all Indians are
[Amit Varma]: one. And I want to ask you more about this after we come back for a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men. Home decor like wall
[Amit Varma]: lights, cushion covers and table linen and accessories like tote bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do. Their artists include luminaries
[Amit Varma]: like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe, Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay
[Amit Varma]: Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Ghera Basmani. They accept bulk orders for corporate and
[Amit Varma]: festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to IndianColors.com. That's colors with an OU. And if you want a 15% discount, apply
[Amit Varma]: the code unseen. U N S double E N. That's unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Kapil Komireddy, author of the
[Amit Varma]: fabulous book Malevolent Republic. You know, and before we went into the break, I quoted
[Amit Varma]: Saeed Ludhianvi's beautiful poem, which you quoted in your book as well. And my next question
[Amit Varma]: is sort of touches on that theme because it struck me and this is something you say elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: in the book also when you're talking about Hyderabad. It struck me that Saeed Ludhianvi
[Amit Varma]: was a Muslim who came from Pakistan to India. It strikes me that those Muslims who chose
[Amit Varma]: to stay back in India actually made a greater act of faith in what we understand as our
[Amit Varma]: idea of India than even the Hindus did. The Hindus kind of just stayed back by default,
[Amit Varma]: right? They are where they are, but they were Muslims who could go to Pakistan and choose
[Amit Varma]: that view of the world and who could stay here and could choose the secular view of
[Amit Varma]: the world. And they chose to stay back and in a sense are more committed to the idea
[Amit Varma]: of India as it were. I'm reminded of that old joke about how do you define the difference
[Amit Varma]: between interested and committed? And you know, you take an egg and you take sausage.
[Amit Varma]: And in the case of the egg, the chicken is interested. But in the case of the sausage,
[Amit Varma]: the pig is committed. And it seems to me like that the Indian Muslim by staying here committed
[Guest]: himself to the idea of India. I think many of us forget what it must have been like for
[Guest]: Muslims at partition. You know, all your core religious are fleeing to Pakistan. There is
[Guest]: violence on the streets. There are refugees from Pakistan who want to hunt you down. Your
[Guest]: businesses are being burnt down to the ground. And still you choose to remain. You choose
[Guest]: to reject the blandishments of paradise in Pakistan. You refuse to vacate India. And
[Guest]: you say this is my home. And you say this is your home not only because of the surroundings.
[Guest]: Obviously there is that. This is where you grew up. This is your natural habitat. But
[Guest]: the habitat is ceasing to exist. But you choose to exist. You choose to remain in India because
[Guest]: of the compact that India is making with you, making with all its citizens. If you're a
[Guest]: Hindu, you don't really have to make that choice. But if you're a Muslim, you have an
[Guest]: option. You have a choice. You have a menu in front of you. Do you remain in India or
[Guest]: do you go to Pakistan? And to choose India is an act of faith, as you say. And it is
[Guest]: an act of commitment to the idea of an inclusive, secular India and a repudiation of an exclusionary
[Guest]: Islamic Pakistan. That is one of the reasons I think India has a special responsibility
[Guest]: to its Muslim citizens because they chose to be here. They made a choice by risking
[Guest]: everything. They put their lives on the line. When Sahir moved to India, Muslims were still
[Guest]: leaving for Pakistan. And Sahir made a political and a personal choice. He said, I belong to
[Guest]: the multiplicity that is India. I'm part of that multitude. I'm a drop in that multitude
[Guest]: of drops known as India. And he made the contrary wise journey and he came to India. Qurettulain
[Guest]: Heather was another writer who came to India from Pakistan and she wrote this extraordinary
[Guest]: novel called Rivers of Fire, in which she reclaimed 5000 years of Indian history. It
[Guest]: starts 5000 years ago and it ends in contemporary India. It's a way of reclaiming your heritage.
[Guest]: It's a way of submerging yourself in India. And the tragedy here is the Muslims who wanted
[Guest]: Pakistan have left. They're gone. They've gone. They've vacated this land. They no longer
[Guest]: exist here. If you are angry and resentful about partition, the people to blame are the
[Guest]: people who live in Pakistan, for whom partition hasn't ended. They still continue to make
[Guest]: savage demands on Indian territory. Be tough with them. Modi wasn't tough with them in
[Guest]: his first term, if you remember. He went to Pakistan. He attended the wedding of a member
[Guest]: of Nawaz Sharif's family. He was sending gifts to Nawaz Sharif's mother. Congress, successive
[Guest]: Congress governments haven't been tough with Pakistan. They've instead unleashed themselves.
[Guest]: They've unburdened their resentments on Indian Muslims who are not to be blamed for partition,
[Guest]: who actually chose India. So that is the tragedy of this.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, they have deposed more faith in India than Hindu hardliners have, who hold the same
[Amit Varma]: sort of two-nation theory that Jinnah had dear to themselves. And this also, what you're
[Amit Varma]: saying, the choices of not just the extraordinary individuals you named, like Sai Ludhianvi
[Amit Varma]: and Kuratul and Haidar, but also millions of ordinary Muslims who made this choice.
[Amit Varma]: What this also does is it gives a lie to the notion that I articulated before the break,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, our constitution or our liberalism was something unnatural. It was imposed from
[Amit Varma]: top and that the people culturally were always what you find a reflection of in today's politics.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not the case because there is also a deep strand in our society, which is inclusive,
[Amit Varma]: which is inclusionary and not exclusionary, which is assimilative in all the best ways,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, another reason I would say that the party in power today is not conservative,
[Amit Varma]: but radical because they are trying to strike down these very deep strains in our Indian
[Amit Varma]: culture. And this would also then seem to indicate that secularism is not just an abstract
[Amit Varma]: Western concept, which has been imported by our leaders, but a lived Indian concept, even
[Amit Varma]: though you may not have, you know, sort of use this term for it. What's your reaction
[Amit Varma]: to this? And also, what's your take on the political conception of secularism and where
[Guest]: it led us?
[Guest]: So, what we think of as secularism is merely the codification of the lived reality of India.
[Guest]: The fundamental truth of India is not intolerance, but tolerance. We have so many communities,
[Guest]: we have so many linguistic minorities, we have so many religious ethnic minorities,
[Guest]: we get along together for the most part. And that's because people live cheek by jowl with
[Guest]: people who are unlike themselves. And they have over years figured out ways to coexist.
[Guest]: And this Indian secularism, the state secularism, merely codified what is the lived reality
[Guest]: of most Indians. What the BJP seeks to do is to transform us into a Hindu version of
[Guest]: Pakistan, by which I mean that it seeks to redefine the individual by his or her faith.
[Guest]: So if you are a Hindu, you are a natural citizen of this country. And if you are a non-Hindu,
[Guest]: then you live here on the sufferings of Hindus. That is not how the Indian state was conceptualized.
[Guest]: And the Indian state's conceptualization is the condition of Indian unity. Secularism
[Guest]: is the basis upon which Indian unity was founded. Without you take away secularism, there is
[Guest]: no means, there is no agent that reconciles these differences. It is because India allows
[Guest]: people to express multiple identities. It is because the Indian state identifies the
[Guest]: fact that individuals are hybrids. We are repositories of multiple identities. We cannot
[Guest]: be reduced to one identity. And we are allowed to express all aspects of our identity that
[Guest]: India thrives. And when you try to reduce individuals as Pakistan has done to one identity,
[Guest]: that is a recipe for calamity. And one of the most interesting things that you're witnessing
[Guest]: today is Muslims are at the forefront of the fight to protect, to save the constitution,
[Guest]: to save the country. For five decades, they have been denigrated as a fifth column. They've
[Guest]: been produced as traitors. They have been asked to account for the partition of India.
[Guest]: And today they are on the streets and their song is the national anthem, their standard
[Guest]: is the national flag, and their sacred book is the constitution of India. It is the Hindu,
[Guest]: the self-pitying Hindu majority that is actually desecrating the constitution, that is actually
[Guest]: denigrating the flag.
[Guest]: That is actually fighting Jinnah's battle.
[Guest]: That is actually finishing the business that Jinnah started us on. That is trying to complete
[Guest]: the business of partition and turn India into a Hindu version of Pakistan. What did Jinnah
[Guest]: say? Jinnah said that Hindus and Muslims are two nations who are fundamentally immiscible.
[Guest]: They cannot co-exist together. They must have separate states. That is what Jinnah got.
[Guest]: And India said, no, that's not what India is. You know, India is a multi-ethnic, multicultural,
[Guest]: multiracial society, and we will prove that we can survive as one.
[Guest]: And Narendra Modi's politics, the BJP's politics, the politics of the RSS is really a tribute
[Guest]: to the vision of Jinnah. They keep telling Muslims, you know, Asad Awaisi, my MP, told
[Guest]: me that, you know, one of the things that really makes him weep in private is when people
[Guest]: tell him to go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And who belongs in Pakistan? Is it the people who fly the national flag, who take pride
[Guest]: in being Indian, who put their lives on the line to remain in India, or the people who
[Guest]: hate what India is, who hate their compatriots and want to remake India into something that
[Guest]: India is fundamentally not? Who hates India more? Is it the Muslims of India or the people
[Guest]: who currently are in power in India? The answer is quite obvious.
[Amit Varma]: That's a wonderful way of putting it. I mean, who should go to Pakistan? Modi should go
[Guest]: to Pakistan. If you put this to him, he would say, been there, attended the wedding.
[Guest]: And he enjoyed it. He loved it. He kept his own cabinet in the dark when he was flying
[Guest]: to Pakistan. Pakistan was really created for people who love homogeneity, who love people,
[Guest]: who like, who think of human beings as milk, and they like to homogenize humans.
[Guest]: The RSS really belongs in Pakistan. You know, Pakistan is the ideal environment for them.
[Amit Varma]: It's custom made for them.
[Amit Varma]: And this is probably a subject for a different episode entirely. But I think there is also
[Amit Varma]: a clash between the state of Pakistan and this founding idea of Pakistan and the society
[Amit Varma]: and the people of Pakistan, who I would say are more tolerant and inclusive and welcoming
[Amit Varma]: than they are otherwise sort of given credit for.
[Amit Varma]: My next question to you is this, that both of us delight in and perhaps even are proud
[Amit Varma]: of this kind of lived secularism, this wholehearted embracing of diversity. But is there a difference
[Amit Varma]: between this kind of social lived secularism and the political secularism that the Congress
[Amit Varma]: Party embodied?
[Guest]: So that political secularism Congress Party embodied was not a rejection of faith. It
[Guest]: was a neutrality and it allowed all religions to express themselves. But here is the problem.
[Guest]: Here is the flaw in that plan. This flaw is not an invitation to dismantle secularism.
[Guest]: It's merely a statement of fact. Hinduism is both a faith and a culture and India is
[Guest]: overwhelmingly Hindu. So it was bound to be the case that Hinduism would eclipse other
[Guest]: religions in its expression when it was reflected, when its values were reflected by the state,
[Guest]: when the state allowed different religions to make claims on it. So if you go to places,
[Guest]: if you go to government buildings, you will find pictures of Hindu deities and Shashi
[Guest]: Tharoor has a line in his book. He says, you know, Hindu rituals were performed at the
[Guest]: opening of buildings when foundation stones were laid down and Muslims often accepted
[Guest]: that in the same way that teetotallers accept alcohol at parties in the West. I spoke to
[Guest]: several Muslims in Hyderabad some years ago. Actually, it seems that they don't. They feel
[Guest]: an element of resentment, but they don't voice that resentment because they feel if they
[Guest]: do, they'll be seen as difficult people. They'll be seen as, you know, ungrateful Muslims.
[Guest]: So we haven't been able to strike that balance. I personally haven't figured out how, you
[Guest]: know, I would like personally to see a secularity that rejects religion altogether, that politics
[Guest]: is a fear in which religion has no business. That would be really ideal, but I know for
[Guest]: various reasons that may not be practicable in India. But I also look on Lal Bahadur Shastri
[Guest]: as a great exponent of Indian secularism. He was invited by a journalist from the Illustrated
[Guest]: Weekly of India to talk about his religion when he became the leader of the Congress
[Guest]: Party. And Shastri was a very religious man and his answer was very curt. He said, I'm
[Guest]: the Prime Minister of India and I will not discuss my religion because there are people
[Guest]: who do not belong to my religion. I'm also their Prime Minister and I do not wish to
[Guest]: alienate them or make them feel that they cannot trust me because I do not, because
[Guest]: I practice a different faith. My faith is my faith. It's my private business. I wish
[Guest]: every Prime Minister would say that. I wish every Prime Minister would make it a point
[Guest]: to remind our press, to remind people who invite politicians to exhibit their religious
[Guest]: faith, to tell them that, you know, that is my private business. By all means, go and
[Guest]: practice your faith. But for the duration that I occupy this high office, I will keep
[Guest]: my faith private. I will keep my religion private. I will not give up my faith. I will
[Guest]: go to the temple, I'll go to church, I'll go to mosque, but I'll do it in my private
[Guest]: time. I will not let that impinge on my public role.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree more. And I didn't know this about Shastri and it's a very statesman
[Amit Varma]: like thing. And it's also telling that in his personal life, he embraced his Hinduness.
[Amit Varma]: He was, as I referred to earlier, you could say that he was a Hindu nationalist leader
[Amit Varma]: within the Congress. But when holding a constitutional office, he kept religion out of it, which
[Amit Varma]: is sort of the way secularism should be. And to sort of go on further, you have also written
[Amit Varma]: in your book about how, you know, while we bemoan how the Hindu nationalists in power
[Amit Varma]: today are trying to rewrite history, the fact is that this was also done by the secularists,
[Amit Varma]: that there was a project of rewriting history to wipe away what happened in the medieval
[Amit Varma]: ages and that we need not have done that. Can you elaborate a bit on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, that is one of the most contentious parts of heritage. We need to accept that
[Guest]: the arrival of Islam in India, certainly in North India, was braided together with extraordinary
[Guest]: violence. And it was accompanied by the destruction, the wholesale destruction of India's heritage,
[Guest]: cultural heritage. In many places, there are no traces of the Hindu-Buddhist past of India.
[Guest]: How do you deal with that past? How do you talk about it? We haven't figured out a way
[Guest]: of talking about that. There is something called memory and that memory is embedded
[Guest]: in people's marrow. People have inherited memories of loss from prior generations. There
[Guest]: are ballads of dispossession that have passed down from generation to generation. People
[Guest]: know that some horror occurred. I was in Varangal in Telangana some years ago and this was in
[Guest]: the 12th century one of the marvels of the world. You know, it was, you know, it traded
[Guest]: diamonds with Europe. Marco Polo visited and he said, you know, I've never seen wealth
[Guest]: like this anywhere. And some tragedy happened there, you know, when Alauddin Khilji sent
[Guest]: his men. People still remember that eight centuries later, seven centuries later and
[Guest]: they are still shaped by that memory but they cannot quite express what that tragedy was.
[Guest]: And when they can't, when there is a vacuum in their memory, that vacuum will be filled
[Guest]: by the garbage purveyed by the current dispensation. So, I think it's best to be honest about
[Guest]: our history, to say that, listen, horrible things happened in the past. We accept that,
[Guest]: we move on from it. Instead of doing that, what the secular establishment did is it found
[Guest]: complex ways of skirting around the issue. So, if you pick up a book by some of our most
[Guest]: distinguished historians, you will put down the book none the wiser. You will not actually
[Guest]: understand what happened in the past. There is such complex prose, jargon is piled upon
[Guest]: jargon to actually evade the reality of what happened. We haven't dealt with that past
[Guest]: and we haven't actually figured out a way of talking about that past. We've come up
[Guest]: with gravity-defying ways of dealing with it, of discussing it. If you look at Pakistan,
[Guest]: I've been to Pakistan. If you talk to people in Pakistan, they're quite open about what
[Guest]: their history was, how India was invaded several times. In India, we haven't talked about that
[Guest]: and we need to find a mature way to discuss that. Otherwise, we, in place of history,
[Guest]: we will have things like Indians colonized Mars, Indians invented the first F-16 jet
[Guest]: or, you know, gold can be mined from cow dung. Stuff like that actually finds an audience
[Guest]: because there is nothing else there. And people go to school in India. I've met, I made it
[Guest]: my mission five years ago to go and meet as many school children as I could and talk to
[Guest]: them about what they knew of history. And it was extremely distressing to find that
[Guest]: they came out of school without a linear understanding of their past. They did not know what happened.
[Guest]: They would say, they would use this phrase, in those days, you know, they'd say terrible
[Guest]: things happened, but they didn't really know what had happened. And when you don't know
[Guest]: what had happened, when you don't know your own history, you're bound to become susceptible
[Guest]: to distortions of history. And that is what we're seeing happen. You know, there are people
[Guest]: who've said, let's burn books. Subramanian Swami invited goons in the BJP to burn histories
[Guest]: written by secular historians. It's very important to remember that secular historians did what
[Guest]: they did from a very noble motivation. It was to deny ammunition to Hindu nationalists.
[Guest]: But the tragedy of that is rather than denying ammunition to Hindu nationalists, they enabled
[Guest]: Hindu nationalists to weaponize history. And we need to be absolutely honest about our
[Guest]: history. That is the only way we can escape the punishing torment of history.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of related musings. But before that, a couple of quotes from your
[Amit Varma]: book, where you sort of expressed all of this really well. First, quote, it was a mission
[Amit Varma]: of secular, quote unquote secular, it was a mission of secular historians and public
[Amit Varma]: intellectuals of India to locate mundane causes for carnage by religious zealots. And later
[Amit Varma]: you say, all imperialism is vicious, but that is not the standard adopted by India's secular
[Amit Varma]: historians. And again, later you say imperialism, in other words, was destructive only when
[Amit Varma]: Europeans did it. When Asians did it, it was a cultural exchange program, stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: your sort of conclusion here is, quote, the secular establishments squandered a rare opening
[Amit Varma]: in the early decades of the Republic to heal that wound by supplying Indians a forthright
[Amit Varma]: accounting of the history, stop quote. And my sort of related musings are, one, the fear
[Amit Varma]: that this came from is actually in some ways a modern fear that description of a particular
[Amit Varma]: sort necessarily implies prescription of another sort. And we see it in modern times as well.
[Amit Varma]: For example, they feared that by saying that Muslim invaders did XYZ, that will implicitly
[Amit Varma]: be a prescription for revenge or whatever. And you see that in modern times, for example,
[Amit Varma]: in the way nature is treated by, you know, there's a certain denialism of science, where,
[Amit Varma]: for example, if you point out differences between sexes or races, they are taken as
[Amit Varma]: not just as statements of differences, but as statements of value and prescriptions on
[Amit Varma]: treating differently, and the two don't necessarily follow. And my other thought there is that
[Amit Varma]: this also comes from a notion of the Congress and others, and I'm not passing a value judgment
[Amit Varma]: on this notion of whether there is something to it or not, is that history is alive, in
[Amit Varma]: a sense that it needs to be remedied. Now, we don't just look at it as something in the
[Amit Varma]: past. And I disagree with this notion. But and Congress, it would be said did believe
[Amit Varma]: this in the context of say, caste, where they were, of course, you know, we've had all of
[Amit Varma]: this caste injustice. And we must, for example, reverse discriminate to sort it out or sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, which plays into a whole different kind of identity politics, or, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: terms of, for example, land distribution, that we must do land redistribution. So through
[Amit Varma]: both of these, and again, I'm not passing a value judgment on either of these, and they
[Amit Varma]: might even be necessary correctives. But in both of these cases, a Congress seems to be
[Amit Varma]: taking the philosophical position that things that have happened in the past should be remedied
[Amit Varma]: in modern times. And if they then believe in this, then this sort of historical this
[Amit Varma]: treatment of history seems rational, I would say wrong, I agree with you on why it is wrong,
[Amit Varma]: because you eventually you've ended up helping these guys to weaponize the part of the history
[Amit Varma]: that we tried to erase out. But it seems to me and I'm just thinking aloud that that is
[Guest]: where the impulse kind of comes from.
[Guest]: I think in this case, it would have been difficult because the elite representation in the Muslim
[Guest]: community, the elite segment of the Muslim community fled to Pakistan after partition.
[Guest]: So the remaining, the remainder of Muslim community in India was actually quite marginal
[Guest]: to the power of the community. So it would have been extremely perverse for them to sort
[Guest]: of try to remedy a historical wrong by blaming anybody. When you talk about caste, to this
[Guest]: day, the upper castes in India are still powerful, that is where they still hold power. Whereas
[Guest]: that was not true of the Muslim community in India, and it would have been extremely
[Guest]: cruel and perverse of them to point the finger at them. And then how would you remedy that?
[Guest]: You know, what would the prescription then be? Would you would you transfer their non
[Guest]: existent properties to Hindus who already had properties and whom would you give the
[Amit Varma]: property to?
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, that is exactly what's happening today. And it was that the fear of that happening
[Amit Varma]: back then that led the Congress to do this. Yeah. And obviously, you have unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: for everything. And these intuitive solutions of, you know, correcting history don't necessarily
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: I'm merely distinguishing caste and religion. Sure. And I will just say about religion,
[Guest]: Congress had tremendous moral authority, and it had it enjoyed massive goodwill among the
[Guest]: people of India. And this was a time at which after the elections in 1951, for instance,
[Guest]: Congress was so powerful, it had such authority to shape India, and what Indians were going
[Guest]: to be, I think it could have used that authority to be honest about India's history, because
[Guest]: that was the opening. That was the moment at which you could do it. And you could do
[Guest]: it in a way that spoke, frankly, about the historical wrongs, without actually prescribing
[Guest]: retribution. And that is the moment that was squandered, that opening was squandered. Instead,
[Guest]: what we had was high-minded, incomprehensible history that actually papered over what happened
[Guest]: in the medieval era. That I will cite, I don't have it in front of me, but from memory, I'll
[Guest]: cite one of the textbooks I read. It says that when the Portuguese came into India,
[Guest]: you know, they presided over conversions of people and Indian society altered fundamentally.
[Guest]: They were horrible. They were uniquely vicious people. The very same textbook, a paragraph
[Guest]: apart, says that when Muslims came to India, there was no fundamental cultural shift, and
[Guest]: they were tolerant, and they did not inflict any injuries on the people of India. That
[Guest]: is infantilizing. And eventually, people are going to question that. And when they question
[Guest]: that, they will feel betrayed. And when they feel betrayed, they will become uniquely susceptible
[Guest]: to the drivel pumped out, the anger pumped out by the Hindu nationalists. And that is
[Guest]: what is happening right now. I myself felt some of that rage when I first read about,
[Guest]: you know, when I first picked up first-hand sources, because I had a very secular upbringing,
[Guest]: extremely secular upbringing. I had a secular upbringing to the extent that we didn't celebrate
[Guest]: Hindu holidays, because we thought it might be offensive to our Muslim neighbors, and
[Guest]: we lived in predominantly Muslim communities. So, it could be an almost comical reaction
[Guest]: to that kind of upbringing to become a Hindu nationalist. So, you must always keep your
[Guest]: antennae up and try to stop yourself from becoming tempted by that release offered by
[Guest]: Hindu nationalism. And yet, what happened in medieval India was so bloody and so horrendous
[Guest]: that unless you find a way of distilling that past and talking about it, you will not be
[Guest]: able to delegitimize the vendors of untruths who are now in power.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me of something that, you know, a friend of mine, Sadanand Hume, was on this
[Amit Varma]: show a few months back. And he told me about this almost dissonant experience he would
[Amit Varma]: have at TV studios, where he would find that people arguing for the Hindu nationalist would
[Amit Varma]: almost have this warped sense of time in history. And in the sense that they will refer to something
[Amit Varma]: that happened yesterday, like I went to lunch at so and so place, and something that happened
[Amit Varma]: 500 years ago, in almost the same breath as if there was absolutely no difference with
[Amit Varma]: them. And would that warp sort of view on history simply be, you know, is it partly
[Amit Varma]: a consequence of this eliding of history where you're taught it in a linear way in school,
[Amit Varma]: and because all of this is absent, they internalize it in a different way? Or is it just that
[Guest]: they're ignorant and uneducated?
[Guest]: See, there is this idea that Hindus are a defeated people. And somehow, people respond
[Guest]: to ideas of revenge. Revenging history is a very popular concept. The temple which stood
[Guest]: on the site of Babri Masjid, if it stood at all, was demolished half a millennium ago.
[Guest]: And yet people respond to it, because for them, it is a way of when you feel defeated,
[Guest]: you will want to acquire the dignity that was taken away from you through any means.
[Guest]: We may dislike it. We may find faults with that. But there is an emotional response that
[Guest]: is tremendously powerful. When you go to people, when people feel they've been wronged, when
[Guest]: people feel that their heritage was destroyed, and when people feel that there is a vacuum,
[Guest]: nobody talked about it, they will respond to cries for justice, even if it happened
[Guest]: a millennium ago. And you will, you can't run away from that. All around us is evidence
[Guest]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't even have to go millennium ago. I mean, the thing is, if we enter a vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle of violence and radicalism, you don't really need to go that far back. I mean, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a Hindu right winger today can point with some justification to what happened in
[Amit Varma]: the Kashmiri pundits, for example, in the early 90s and point to that as cause enough
[Amit Varma]: for his radicalism. How do we break out of these cycles of violence? Like one of the
[Amit Varma]: very interesting things you sort of pointed out in your book is that this movement may
[Amit Varma]: be incompetent in government, but it's peerless in opposition. You know, I mean, incompetent
[Amit Varma]: in government, obviously, you can see what has happened, though I think Vajpayee was
[Amit Varma]: a much better Prime Minister than Modi is, but that's a different story. But incompetent
[Amit Varma]: in government, but peerless in opposition. And the thing is, it's very easy, like the
[Amit Varma]: Congress is finding out to be in opposition in the sense that you can then be perennially
[Amit Varma]: virtuous depending on how you define virtue when you're not faced with the everyday reality
[Amit Varma]: of governing and actually running a country, a challenge that these guys haven't even really
[Amit Varma]: taken seriously. Otherwise, they would have behaved more statesmanly, like say Shastri
[Amit Varma]: did, a person they have tried to co-opt, rather than behaving in the ways that they have.
[Amit Varma]: And that would then seem to indicate that if you are against the Hindu nationalist movement,
[Amit Varma]: and you do believe in our natural secularism, the left secularism, our tolerance to sort
[Amit Varma]: of express itself and take over again, then a political victory isn't enough, because
[Amit Varma]: these guys are going to continue. And especially because what you also see is that now it is
[Amit Varma]: actually a moot issue, what kind of history is taught in schools, because I think more
[Amit Varma]: people learn from what is colloquially referred to as a WhatsApp university.
[Guest]: This project of distilling our history is not for the Hindu nationalists. They don't
[Guest]: have the intellectual equipment to do that. This is, to the extent that there is a prescription
[Guest]: in my book, it's for the secularists among us. I'm speaking to people like you. I'm speaking
[Guest]: to people like Sadanand.
[Guest]: But we are the converted.
[Amit Varma]: In what way? Sorry.
[Guest]: In the sense we are secular already.
[Guest]: We are secular already, but I'm saying in order to save the secular cause, in order
[Guest]: to convert the people who aren't secular, in order to bring them back, in order to rescue
[Guest]: India, in order to save India, in order to ensure India's future, we need to be honest
[Guest]: about our past. That is, to the extent that there is a prescription in my book, I think
[Guest]: we should find mature ways of talking about our past. Because WhatsApp university, quote
[Guest]: unquote, is popular today, doesn't mean that we pack our bags and give up. We find new
[Guest]: ways to fight. We can't admit defeat to these people. We can't let this distortion of history
[Guest]: become the norm in India. We've become the world's laughingstock as a result of it. And
[Guest]: if we take pride, you began this segment by talking about taking pride in being Indian.
[Guest]: And if we are to take pride in being Indian, we must fight back against people who make
[Guest]: a mockery of Indianness. And that is the very precise argument I was trying to make in the
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: One more thing, Amit, is that these people will never, will never give up in the sense
[Guest]: that if they exhaust one cause, they will find another cause. Because what is fueling
[Guest]: them now is not undoing an historical wrong. What is fueling them is a sense of self-pity.
[Guest]: And there is nothing more damaging, destructive than self-pity.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the thing, it's far easier to build a movement and sustain a movement and make
[Amit Varma]: a movement reach critical mass on hate rather than, you know, better emotions. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: victimhood is very appealing in politics, whether it's from the right wing or the left
[Amit Varma]: wing, you know, and one of the common things to many populist movements is that it involves
[Amit Varma]: a majority invoking its own victimhood, which is kind of absurd. I mean, given that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the Muslim population in India is far more disempowered than they were before partition
[Amit Varma]: and they are far poorer than Hindus for, you know, for us to still claim that victimhood
[Amit Varma]: is slightly bizarre to me. Now, given all of these things that you're going to motivate
[Amit Varma]: a movement more on negative emotions and on positive emotions, which perhaps also explains
[Amit Varma]: the trend in recent times of voter turnout being far higher for right wing populist movements
[Amit Varma]: than their opponents, because, you know, stronger motivations from, oh, you know, Hindu khatre
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you go out and vote, rather than let's all live together peacefully, which
[Amit Varma]: so how do you react to that as a challenge? And also, what do you think of the contemporary
[Amit Varma]: protests which are going on? I mean, you know, as we are recording this as a start of February,
[Amit Varma]: this Shaheen Bagh happening, there are spontaneous protests all across the country. I think my
[Amit Varma]: friend Prem Panikkar posted a map on Twitter where he had pins on a map of India, all over
[Amit Varma]: showing that the and these are not centrally planned. These are not coming from one place.
[Amit Varma]: These are spontaneous protests that are erupting with ordinary people using technology, which
[Amit Varma]: is not something I would have foreseen a couple of months ago. You know, I was pretty I had
[Amit Varma]: given up a lot of hope. But now this is happening. What's your sense of this?
[Guest]: So your first question was about the difficulty of combating the right with something more
[Guest]: virtuous. And your second question was about the organic eruption of protests built on
[Guest]: upholding the virtue of the Constitution. So in answer to the first question, Raymond
[Guest]: Aron wrote something during Algeria's fight for independence. He said, you know, it is
[Guest]: the lesson of the 20th century, that in the contest between passions and interests, passions
[Guest]: will always defeat interests. You know, it is a mistake to think that interests can trump
[Guest]: passions. So we have a contest between passion and interest. Narendra Modi is demonstrably
[Guest]: not good for you, good for your interests. This is the man who singed the economy. This
[Guest]: is a man who presided over, as you put it, the largest single destruction of private
[Guest]: property in human history, which was demonetization. And yet people reelected him because he appealed
[Guest]: to and incited their passions. Now, how do you fight back? The fight back is right in
[Guest]: front of us. What we are witnessing with CAA, with the protests against CAA and NRC, Shaheen
[Guest]: Bagh and across the country. I've been to Shaheen Bagh. I spent time there. I've been
[Guest]: to other protest sites. I've spoken to protesters. What you're witnessing is not just a response
[Guest]: to this legislation. It is a belated eruption of grievances that piled up over five years.
[Guest]: It is a belated response to demonetization. It is a belated response to unemployment.
[Guest]: It is a belated response to the absence of smart cities. All the promises, every major
[Guest]: promise made by Modi, every major developmental promise made by Modi is unfulfilled. Every
[Guest]: major promise made to his religious base, his ideological base is fulfilled. Kashmir,
[Guest]: Ram Janmabhoomi, now CAA. So, these are ordinary people protesting against the authoritarian
[Guest]: turn of the government. And the trigger is the CAA legislation and the prospect of a
[Guest]: nationwide registry of citizens. I look at these protests with great pride because they
[Guest]: reveal to us that you began earlier this interview by asking me if, you know, about people who
[Guest]: say that our constitution is an imposition. But what these protests reveal is the depths
[Guest]: to which the content of the constitution has percolated. We are now a country of citizens
[Guest]: and people are asserting their citizenly rights against a government that is denying them
[Guest]: those rights. So, this is a moment, if Nehru was looking at us, he'd be very proud. This
[Guest]: is, you know, in a moment of crisis, we have risen to the occasion. The people of India
[Guest]: have risen to the occasion across the country. This is an organic uprising against this hideous
[Guest]: regime. So, and what are they protesting for? They're protesting for the protection of the
[Guest]: constitution against the assault of this government. But I also look at this protest with some
[Guest]: pessimism because I fear that we overlook the extraordinary power of the prime minister.
[Guest]: He's six months into his second term. He has a super majority in parliament. He has bottomless
[Guest]: supplies of cash at his disposal. And I mentioned this fact because goons can be hired, cash
[Guest]: can be given, protests can be disrupted and delegitimized. And the prime minister has
[Guest]: means to do that. The prime minister also innovated the state. He destroyed autonomous
[Guest]: state institutions in his first term. So, he is the master. He has total authority over
[Guest]: the instruments of force. The police is completely under his thumb. Even the armed forces have
[Guest]: been politicized. So, he has that raw power of the malicious raised by the Hindu nationalists
[Guest]: over the past five decades are at his beck and call, but also the state institutions
[Guest]: have completely caved. So, the prime minister is enormously powerful and he can crush these
[Guest]: protesters at the time of his choosing. There are people who believe that because the international
[Guest]: press is aggressively covering it, they have allies abroad. We should remember they do
[Guest]: not have allies abroad. Foreign nations, foreign press will not sustain its coverage. You know,
[Guest]: they have their own problems at home. You know, they will not focus their energies entirely
[Guest]: on India and their ability to influence India's behavior is also very limited. Modi will eventually
[Guest]: cease to care about what the world thinks about him. You know, if it's a question of
[Guest]: his reputation on the world stage and power at home, he will choose power at home. So,
[Guest]: it is important to remember that Modi in this contest, Modi is the more powerful person
[Guest]: and nobody should doubt the power of the prime minister. But remember this, if these protests
[Guest]: could either rescue India or they could be the swan song to the India that was, and if
[Guest]: we lose India after this, if India goes to a point of no return, we can take pride in
[Guest]: the fact that India didn't just give up. India didn't just fall on its knees when
[Guest]: it faltered. India fought back and the fight back was extraordinary. And the fight back
[Guest]: was beautiful. The fight back was inclusive. The fight back spoke for the values upon which
[Guest]: this country was founded. And we, you know, we didn't go silently into the night. We
[Guest]: raised our voice. This is something Indians can take tremendous pride in. But we must
[Guest]: hope that there are remnants of democratic impulses in the prime minister and that he
[Guest]: will listen to the people of India and that he will withdraw from this fight. He's never
[Guest]: withdrawn. He's never lost a direct political fight in his life. But we have to hope that,
[Guest]: you know, in this contest, the prime minister will be reined in by the vestiges of democratic
[Amit Varma]: impulses in him. Yeah, we'll rage, rage against the dying of
[Amit Varma]: the light. But I have sort of two questions. One of them is that this goes back to my earlier
[Amit Varma]: point of the conception being flawed, not just the execution, like the fear that you
[Amit Varma]: correctly express and that I share is that the power of the coercive state is way too
[Amit Varma]: much. They can crush these protests anytime you want. That is unfortunately the case.
[Amit Varma]: They can crush dissent anytime they want. The only reason someone like me hasn't been
[Amit Varma]: crushed is because I'm too small and insignificant, but they can crush anybody anytime. So the
[Amit Varma]: issue is with the coercive state itself. Like I did an episode with the historian Gyan Prakash
[Amit Varma]: on the emergency where he pointed out that nothing that Indira Gandhi did during that
[Amit Varma]: time was illegal or unconstitutional. That centralization of power which allowed her
[Amit Varma]: to rule in such an autocratic way was written down in the constitution. And Gyan's point,
[Amit Varma]: of course, was that the founders of the constitution sat down and framed the constitution in a
[Amit Varma]: room in Delhi at a time where there were protests, there was violence across the country and
[Amit Varma]: one was not sure whether the center can hold and therefore the centralized power. And Madhav
[Amit Varma]: Khosla, of course, in his wonderful book, India's founding moment as a far greater sort
[Amit Varma]: of a much finer narrative about how these decisions to centralize the state came about
[Amit Varma]: and a lot of it makes incredible sense. But what it has also unleashed is that the coercive
[Amit Varma]: state is way too powerful for democratic impulses to come through. Like right now, you said
[Amit Varma]: that one hopes that Narendra Modi will, you know, listen to whatever vestiges of democratic
[Amit Varma]: impulses are left within him. But I'm like, why should we hope for a person's, the better
[Amit Varma]: angels of a person's nature to come to our aid? You know, the system itself should have
[Amit Varma]: those safeguards in place and restrict the power of a person like that. And the problem
[Amit Varma]: here isn't Narendra Modi per se. And this is perhaps the libertarian in me saying the
[Guest]: problem is a coercive state. Yeah. And we have, there are institutions to check that
[Guest]: power. There is the Supreme Court of India. There is a judiciary. Easy enough to capture
[Amit Varma]: though, as we have seen, like you've pointed out, for example, that the judge who, you
[Amit Varma]: know, let Amit Shah go in that acquitted Amit Shah in that case. Governor of Kerala. There
[Guest]: you go. Yeah. The thing is, we have to remember that institutions are peopled by human beings
[Guest]: and human beings are weak. Human beings, you made that point earlier, you know, human beings
[Guest]: will respond to incentives and human beings will respond to threats. The best, we're looking
[Guest]: at the United States of America, you know, the Republican Party is one of their great
[Guest]: institutions and it has completely surrendered to Donald Trump. Every nation, every institution
[Guest]: that is necessary for the competent functioning of government is ultimately run by human beings
[Guest]: and the caliber of human beings that run it. Who in his right mind would want to take on
[Guest]: the prime minister right now? Would, you know, if you're running an agency in the government,
[Guest]: would you want to challenge the prime minister of authority? There are people who've done
[Guest]: it. You know, let us remember when UPA was in power, there was a bureaucrat who challenged
[Guest]: Robert Vadra and he found himself being transferred, relocated to some barren district. You know,
[Guest]: this is not Modi alone who's done this. Modi is not unprecedented. You know, Modi is very
[Guest]: much part of a tradition in India and the answer to this is the public protests. It
[Guest]: is the people of India who've come out in the streets. It's not the institutions of
[Guest]: India. The institutions of India have proven themselves to be weak and fragile. It is the
[Guest]: ordinary people of India who've proven themselves to be powerful citizens. It is the constitution,
[Guest]: is the values that animate the constitutions are finding expression in the protests across
[Guest]: India, not in the institutions of India. So in that contest between the citizen and the
[Guest]: state, of course, the state is more powerful, but the state's power is exhaustible, whereas
[Guest]: the citizen's power, we'll have to see how far that will take us. You know, how it is
[Guest]: impossible, I agree with you, to sustain people's protests of the kind that are taking place
[Guest]: across India. So unfortunately, my answer to you is not going to be a hopeful one, because
[Guest]: as much as I want to drag this on and find a way of, you know, convincing myself that
[Guest]: we can, you know, that institutions will reign the prime minister in, we still are at the
[Guest]: mercy of the better angels of Narendra Modi at the moment.
[Guest]: Okay, that is the opposite of hopeful. What I mean, I just want to say that this doesn't
[Guest]: necessarily indict the framers of our constitution or the founders of our republic. It just reveals
[Guest]: that human beings ultimately are the people who run the show and the kind of country will
[Guest]: be will depend on the caliber of the people who run the institutions upon which your country's
[Guest]: performance depends.
[Amit Varma]: I would say that I disagree with that. I mean, I agree that it is silly to blame the conception
[Amit Varma]: or the constitution or the framers of the constitution in hindsight, because this stuff
[Amit Varma]: looks obvious. But I think that, you know, if they sat down today to make a constitution,
[Amit Varma]: knowing what is known today about incentives and the way people respond and understanding
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory, they would definitely have designed a system that works far better
[Amit Varma]: in terms of reigning state power and making many of these excesses, not so likely, but
[Amit Varma]: my other...
[Guest]: Many of the instructions yell down to the offices. For instance, we have heard a tape
[Guest]: which was published by Cobra Post, I think, years ago, Amit Shah yelling instructions
[Guest]: to the police officers in Gujarat to stalk a woman.
[Amit Varma]: Because Sahib wanted it, you know.
[Guest]: That was definitely illegal. There was no legal sanction for it. And the police was
[Guest]: doing it because the Home Minister wanted it done. So I think had there been rules explicitly
[Guest]: prohibiting...
[Guest]: There are rules explicitly prohibiting the Home Minister from doing that, but yet he
[Guest]: was able to do it. Power functions in a different way. And any number of rules can be written.
[Guest]: They will not amount to much if people do not uphold them. Even if our constitution
[Guest]: was revised and rewritten to take into account the conditions of today, I don't think they
[Guest]: could reign in Modi. Because once you acquire power, it's very difficult to reign in power.
[Guest]: And the only way to do that is... This is the reason I think Nehru is such an extraordinary
[Guest]: figure because he had so much power at his disposal and he didn't abuse it.
[Amit Varma]: I would still say that there are a lot of changes to the design of that conception and
[Amit Varma]: not for a moment am I saying the constitution should be rewritten because if it is, it'll
[Amit Varma]: become something far worse than what it already is. Both of us know that. And that would be
[Amit Varma]: something to be very scared of. But what I would say is that within the design, you can
[Amit Varma]: make things better. For example, the separation of powers between the executive and the legislature,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and right now, if you look at what's happening in India, the legislature is completely
[Amit Varma]: toothless. And if you look at what it is in the US, okay, Trump has gone out of control,
[Amit Varma]: he's captured the Republican Party, blah, blah, there are many things to be moaned there.
[Amit Varma]: But I would hold that Trump can do far less damage to the United States than Modi can
[Amit Varma]: to India, because Modi has far more power here. And over there, the institutions are
[Amit Varma]: still functioning, because of the way they were designed. But no, I would just say that
[Guest]: the Parliament, unfortunately, has been reduced to a rubber stamp. And this process began
[Guest]: again, a long time ago. And one of the things Modi has done, which people don't reflect
[Guest]: on very much is he has converted BJP into a version of the Congress Party. The BJP was
[Guest]: one of the few political parties in India that was actually internally democratic. The
[Guest]: Prime Minister's own biography is a tribute to the democratic nature of the BJP. He was,
[Guest]: after all, a lower caste tea seller from Gujarat, whose assent the party actually enabled. What
[Guest]: he's done is he's destroyed the BJP, pretty much the way in which Mrs. Gandhi destroyed
[Guest]: the Congress. He's destroyed the BJP's internal workings, and he has created a cult of personality
[Guest]: unrivaled in India's history. The only equal is Mrs. Gandhi, but I think he's exceeded
[Guest]: even her now.
[Amit Varma]: I think he's a true successor to Mrs. Gandhi, first of all. And secondly, I would say that
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, she was still worse than excesses of the emergency, which you have also written
[Amit Varma]: about in your book, where we, for example, there were more people sterilized, there were
[Amit Varma]: 15 times more people sterilized in India than done by the Nazis. Yeah, you know, and virtually
[Amit Varma]: the entire opposition and the press was in prison, which is not yet the case here. We
[Amit Varma]: are getting there. And what's happening in Kashmir is absolutely shocking and already
[Amit Varma]: normalized. And, you know, we're recording this on Feb. 7. I don't know how much worse
[Guest]: things will become.
[Guest]: The cult of personality is certainly bigger than Indira Gandhi because the money, the
[Guest]: kind of money and technology at Modi's disposal, but the abuse of power is nowhere as grotesque
[Guest]: as it was during Mrs. Gandhi's reign. That is that is a point we must make. But what
[Guest]: Modi has done is he has converted the BJP into a version of the Congress Party. He doesn't
[Guest]: have children, so there's no fear of a dynasty, but there is an ideological dynasty. So, in
[Guest]: time, I mentioned this in the book, we may look back on Modi as the moderate because
[Guest]: his successor, if it's Amit Shah or Adityanath, are going to be infinitely more radical than
[Guest]: he is. And this is the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a trend, as I mentioned earlier, in, you know, through the leaders of the Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: movement.
[Guest]: You go from bad to worse.
[Amit Varma]: You go from bad to worse. My other question goes back to a point that you were making
[Amit Varma]: earlier where you cited Raymond Aron talking in the context of Algeria, where he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about passion and interests and how passion will always win out, which, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: analogous to how the most ignorant people always show the most certitude. And the more
[Amit Varma]: you know, the more you are full of doubt and the more intellectual humility you have.
[Amit Varma]: So in that context of passions, what I find in India today and what gives me a lot of
[Amit Varma]: despair is that all the political parties are catering to those passions. It's not just
[Amit Varma]: that it's a BJP. You have, for example, Congress governments in various states like the Kamal
[Amit Varma]: Nath government in Madhya Pradesh doing things for cow protection and so on and so forth,
[Amit Varma]: the sort of soft Hindutva happening there. You have Kejriwal in Delhi and at one point
[Amit Varma]: the Aam Aadmi Party seemed such a big hope in terms of a political movement erupting
[Amit Varma]: out of a protest. And instead, what you find is that he has also stayed away from the Shaheen
[Amit Varma]: Bagh issues in Delhi at the time of speaking. And obviously, the elections are just around
[Amit Varma]: the corner. And by the time this says those will be out, but those don't have any bearing
[Amit Varma]: on it. He's kept these protests at an arm's length and he doesn't want to piss off the
[Amit Varma]: very people who are the base of the BJP, who the BJP has captured right now. So what he
[Amit Varma]: is saying is that I am not necessarily against you guys or with Shaheen Bagh. I am just saying
[Amit Varma]: vote for me for governance. A, does this worry you that all of the political party cater
[Amit Varma]: to these negative passions which are leading us awry and which are dividing our society?
[Amit Varma]: And B, is it also something you worry about that when a political party does emerge out
[Amit Varma]: of these protests as the Aam Aadmi Party did out of an earlier protest, they will again
[Amit Varma]: be prey to the incentives of politics and driven by the desire for power rather than
[Guest]: out of any higher ideals? That's such a fascinating question. Let me
[Guest]: just digest that question and give you an answer. We are at a point in our history where
[Guest]: we can clear the stables because for the first time, we are witnessing a pan-Indian backlash
[Guest]: against a prime minister who ended the coalition era. So this is a moment in which a pan-Indian
[Guest]: political party could be born. But the existing political parties are completely bankrupt
[Guest]: ideologically and ethically. And the trend of course again was set by the Congress Party.
[Guest]: The obstacle to the rise of a pan-Indian political party is of course the Congress Party because
[Guest]: it occupies the opposition. It lulls us into the false belief that there is an opposition
[Guest]: party when in fact there isn't an opposition party. So I have been, wherever I've been
[Guest]: going and speaking to people, I've been urging them not to vote for the Congress Party but
[Guest]: to vote for a better alternative. If the Congress Party dies, we are more likely to see the
[Guest]: emergence of a true political alternative to the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to interrupt you but wouldn't it also be the case that if the Gandhis were
[Amit Varma]: somehow out of the way and their capture of the party ended?
[Guest]: You needn't finish that question because I agree entirely with you. The Congress Party
[Guest]: is like an army. It has excellent armory but it is presided over by an utterly corrupt
[Guest]: general. You replace the general and you repurpose the army. You could do that but there is the
[Guest]: fear that if that general goes, all the troops will be demoralized. Why don't you find a
[Guest]: better general who can actually mobilize them, who can give them hope again?
[Guest]: There are people in the Congress Party who can do that. I was in southern India and I
[Guest]: spoke to a former minister who is still a member of parliament and he and I have had
[Guest]: very intense arguments in the past and we had very heated arguments but he came up to
[Guest]: me this time and he said to me, I agree entirely with you and I would like to see this family
[Guest]: gone. This is a man who's been appointed to his job by the family. This is a man who owes
[Guest]: his career to the family and he said, but I care more about the country than I do about
[Amit Varma]: my own career.
[Amit Varma]: This is, by the way, something other Congress leaders have said to me in private but they
[Amit Varma]: will never say it in public.
[Guest]: They will never say it in public. Instead, he was urging me to amplify that message to
[Guest]: say that go after the family. We need to get rid of them. He said, for a year, there'll
[Guest]: be chaos in the party. There'll be demands to bring the family back but the family must
[Guest]: go and they must be a new leader and, you know, Congress will survive the exit of the
[Guest]: Gandhi family and it is now, I think, in the national interest for the family to leave
[Guest]: this party.
[Guest]: This party can no longer be an instrument for the realization of the personal desires
[Guest]: and dreams of one family. It has to be an instrument for the reclamation of India. So
[Guest]: there is already an existing infrastructure. You can repurpose this army to become a true
[Guest]: opposition party. So I would say if you can't vote against Congress party, at least join
[Guest]: the Congress party and clamor for the defenestration of the Gandhi family, clamor for a new leadership.
[Guest]: If you want to rescue India, that project is the project of a generation and it will
[Guest]: begin  you will have to begin by rescuing the Congress party and rescuing the Congress
[Guest]: party means removing the Gandhis. Please remove this family. This family is now the principal
[Guest]: obstacle. If India goes to a point of no return, a massive share of the responsibility, blame,
[Guest]: will have to be shouldered by this family. We are at a point when we can go down the
[Guest]: route of Yugoslavia and congressmen are still unable to raise their voices and say that
[Guest]: please leave, please give the Congress party back to the people of India so they can use
[Guest]: it as a vehicle for true secularism, for true liberalism. There's nobody willing to say
[Guest]: that, nobody willing to risk his or her career. They did that when Sonia Gandhi became the
[Guest]: leader of the Congress party, Sangma and Sharath Pawar.
[Guest]: And look what happened to them.
[Guest]: And look what happened to them. They, you know, they came back into the fold.
[Amit Varma]: I actually wrote a column about this about, you know, looking at it from a perspective
[Amit Varma]: of game theory, that it's very suboptimal for someone to be the first to speak out.
[Amit Varma]: You would rather free roll and wait for other people to rebel and then kind of ride the
[Guest]: wave.
[Guest]: But, you know, that momentum, in order for that momentum to come about, you need someone
[Guest]: to make that voice. I imagine if Shashi Tharoor made that speech tomorrow. Imagine if someone
[Guest]: like that, there are people, I don't want to name people because I've had private conversations
[Guest]: with a lot of people. I think they're waiting for that first spark. I remember I, this is
[Guest]: perhaps not the right analogy, the right story, but I remember watching, I remember reading
[Guest]: about Romania, you know, Nicolae Ceausescu was so powerful that, you know, he came back
[Guest]: from a tour of the Middle East and he was giving a speech in the public square and it
[Guest]: took one person to make a noise against him.
[Guest]: And eventually the entire crowd yelled against him and he had to take a helicopter from the
[Guest]: roof of that building and within four days he was gone.
[Amit Varma]: That's what the sociologist Timur Kuran calls a preference cascade, where earlier you have
[Amit Varma]: preference falsification and no one is speaking up because they're scared. They're the only
[Amit Varma]: one who feel that way and they're scared to speak up. But once one guy speaks up, there's
[Amit Varma]: a cascade and then things change very fast. Except that I worry that in India, the preferences
[Guest]: are sort of in the wrong direction at the moment.
[Guest]: Well, there is an entire category, there's an entire class of people who will happily
[Guest]: have a monarchy in India if it's run by the Gandhi family because they genuinely believe
[Guest]: that the Gandhi family are protectors of Indian secularism. There are genuinely people and
[Guest]: you cannot reason with them. You cannot show them proof that, hang on, this is what Rahul
[Guest]: Gandhi did, this is what Rajiv Gandhi did, this is what Indira Gandhi did, this is what
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh did when he was Prime Minister. You can't talk to them, you can't reason with
[Guest]: them because they are completely lost in their devotions to the Gandhi family. Those people
[Guest]: you cannot convert and our energies are finite. We shouldn't squander them on trying to convert
[Guest]: them. We should rather direct them at people who might be able to create an alternative
[Guest]: Congress party. And I, to the extent that there are any listeners in the Congress party,
[Guest]: I would urge them, please write to your MP, write to your leader and tell them to speak
[Guest]: up against the Gandhi's. Join the Congress party, take up primary membership of the Congress
[Guest]: party and call for elections, call for democratic elections within the Congress party. That
[Amit Varma]: is one source of hope. I think any Congress member who's just heard this has thought to
[Amit Varma]: himself, I'll join the cascade, but I'm not going to be the first guy to raise my hand.
[Amit Varma]: We have like 10 minutes left to wrap this up. And normally what I do is at the end of
[Amit Varma]: my episode, I ask people about what gives them hope and what gives them despair. But
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken about that for all of this episode. Those have almost been the two principal points
[Amit Varma]: of our discussion. And I usually begin my episode by asking people to trace their personal
[Amit Varma]: journeys and there wasn't kind of enough of that. So let's sort of end on a note of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, okay, not, I won't ask you mundane details of how do you earn a living or where do you
[Amit Varma]: live or what do you do? But what I would actually be very interested in, and I'm sure my listeners
[Amit Varma]: as well, are what are your dominant intellectual influences? Like, are there any thinkers or
[Amit Varma]: books that changed the way you think about the world? If you had to recommend say three
[Amit Varma]: or five books to my listeners that you feel they must go out and read, what would they
[Guest]: be? Give me a sense of that.
[Guest]: Right. The thinkers who've profoundly influenced me are Gandhi, Nehru in India. And abroad,
[Guest]: I've been massively influenced by movements abroad. I've been, I've followed Eastern European
[Guest]: politics for a long time and I've taken, I've found that to be a fount of tremendous hope.
[Guest]: But I think we have in India, there is such an untapped source of wisdom and inspiration
[Guest]: in India. And I constantly look to parts of India that are neglected. I look to South
[Guest]: India, I look to Eastern India and it's, I would say that every day I wake up and find
[Guest]: myself profoundly ignorant because I discover things that I didn't know before. And often
[Guest]: when you acquire knowledge by reading, you think you have gained an insight that allows
[Guest]: you to disregard other insights. And it's a battle with yourself to reign your own arrogance
[Guest]: in to say that, no, no, no, I don't know enough. Let me hear the other side. You know, John
[Guest]: Stuart Mill says that even a lie should be allowed to be aired in public because there
[Guest]: are two utilities. One is that if you listen to the opposing perspective, it'll challenge
[Guest]: your own belief and you'll be able to challenge it. You'll be able to sharpen your own argument.
[Guest]: But the other utility is that if it's a lie, then it will be heard by people and people
[Guest]: will be able to reject it anyway. So I've been trying very much to listen to opposing
[Guest]: perspectives. I've been trying to read people whom I disagree with profoundly, but coming
[Guest]: to the more precise question of the books that really affected me, I read very eclectically.
[Guest]: I read everything. Most of my time is spent reading. I will read anything. I'll read a
[Guest]: report on agriculture. I'll read a 500 page report. I may not retain all the information,
[Guest]: but I'll read it. But the book that really affected me in a way that I didn't think books
[Guest]: would, you know, I had a physical reaction to the book, was V. S. Ninepole's An Area
[Guest]: of Darkness. People say this book has changed my life. It didn't change my life. I read
[Guest]: it at a time in life where I had certain beliefs. I was quite certain that I was secularist.
[Guest]: I wasn't going to, you know, become a votary of religious nationalism. No way. But it spoke
[Guest]: to me in a way that no book before had. I had a very physical reaction. I had to put
[Guest]: the book down several times because nobody had written about India that way. And it was
[Guest]: only 190 pages. And then I read Wounded Civilization by V. S. Ninepole. That also had a profound
[Guest]: effect on me. Not as profound as An Area of Darkness, but it really moved me. So these
[Guest]: are the two books I would recommend to anybody wanting to understand India. Whether you're
[Guest]: a secularist, whether you're a Hindu nationalist, whatever your ideological belief, read those
[Guest]: books. Read V. S. Ninepole because I cannot think of another writer, not even Orwell,
[Guest]: who conveyed truth with such clarity. Beyond Ninepole, the book that I would very much
[Guest]: recommend is The Discovery of India by Nehru. It's an extraordinary work. It's not a work
[Guest]: of history. It's not a work of scholarship, but it tells you about the calibre of our
[Guest]: leadership.
[Guest]: It lays out the vision of the world, so to say.
[Guest]: It shows you how sophisticated our inaugural prime minister was, what an extraordinary
[Guest]: man he was, what an extraordinary man of learning he was, and what a capacious vision he had.
[Amit Varma]: And it's striking that you should say this when in your book, there is actually a tremendous
[Amit Varma]: amount of criticism of Nehru. And yet he is one of the people who's inspired you and is
[Amit Varma]: a hero to you, which indicates, like, I don't want to flatter you, but the kind of minds
[Amit Varma]: who I like to read and follow are people who are open to a multiplicity of views on a single
[Amit Varma]: subject and sort of, you know, who don't take, like, today the world looks at Nehru so simplistically.
[Amit Varma]: He's either very, very good or very, very bad. And it's sort of important to know that.
[Guest]: I think in Nehru's personality was reflected all the multiplicity of India. And I find
[Guest]: him to be, I admire him immensely. I mean, one shouldn't use the word hero loosely, but
[Guest]: if I had a hero, I think it would be Nehru. I admire that man immensely. And which is
[Guest]: precisely why I find the flaws so dispiriting and so galling. And those are the three books
[Guest]: I've recommended, but other books I'm, you know, there are so many books that shape one's
[Guest]: personality that shapes one's thinking. There are so many to single one out would be to
[Guest]: omit others. But if you're looking for recommendations, I would say Malevolent Republic is a pretty
[Amit Varma]: good book. I second that for all my listeners. There are actually a couple of areas in your
[Amit Varma]: book that I slightly disagree with, like your characterization of liberalization, where
[Amit Varma]: I think you find a causal link between the good things P. V. Narasimha Rao did and the
[Amit Varma]: bad things and I don't quite agree with that, but we'll talk about it in some other episode.
[Amit Varma]: Sure. Kapil, thanks so much. It's been an absolute privilege having you on the show.
[Guest]: It has been an honour for me. Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and please pick up Malevolent Republic by Kapil Komireddy. Tons of thought provoking
[Amit Varma]: insights there and absolutely fabulous prose. You can follow Kapil on Twitter at Kapskom.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Varma. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution. You can find out more about their awesome public policy courses
[Amit Varma]: at takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening.